SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TYPE: Political and Social Essay
What are your chances of success ? Social reforms fall into different species.
There is a species of reform, which does not relate to the religious notion of
people but is purely secular in character. There is also a species of reform,
which relates to the religious notions of people. Of such a species of reform,
there are two varieties. In one, the reform accords with the principles of the
religion and merely invites people, who have departed from it, to revert to
them and to follow them. The second is a reform which not only touches
the religious principles but is diametrically opposed to those principles
and invites people to depart from and to discard their authority and to
act contrary to those principles. Caste is the natural outcome of certain
religious beliefs which have the sanction of the Shastras, which are believed
to contain the command of divinely inspired sages who were endowed with a
supernatural wisdom and whose commands, therefore, cannot be disobeyed
without committing sin. The destruction of Caste is a reform which falls
under the third category. To ask people to give up Caste is to ask them to
go contrary to their fundamental religious notions. It is obvious that the
first and second species of reform are easy. But the third is a stupendous
task, well-nigh impossible. The Hindus hold to the sacredness of the social
order. Caste has a divine basis. You must therefore destroy the sacredness
and divinity with which Caste has become invested. In the last analysis,
this means you must destroy the authority of the Shastras and the Vedas.
I have emphasized this question of the ways and means of destroying Caste,
because I think that knowing the proper ways and means is more important
than knowing the ideal. If you do not know the real ways and means, all
your shots are sure to be misfires. If my analysis is correct then your task
is herculean. You alone can say whether you are capable of achieving it.
Speaking for myself, I see the task to be well-nigh impossible. Perhaps you
would like to know why I think so. Out of the many reasons, which have led
me to take this view, I will mention some, which I regard much important.
One of these reasons is the attitude of hostility, which the Brahmins have
shown towards this question. The Brahmins form the vanguard of the
movement for political reform and in some cases also of economic reform.
But they are not to be found even as camp-followers in the army raised
to break down the barricades of Caste. Is there any hope of the Brahmins
ever taking up a lead in the future in this matter ? I say no. You may ask
why ? You may argue that there is no reason why Brahmins should continue
to shun social reform. You may argue that the Brahmins know that the
bane of Hindu Society is Caste and as an enlightened class could not be
expected to be indifferent to its consequences. You may argue that there
are secular Brahmins and priestly Brahmins and if the latter do not take
up the cudgels on behalf of those who want to break Caste, the former will.
All this of course sounds very plausible. But in all this it is forgotten that
the break up of the Caste system is bound to affect adversely the Brahmin
Caste. Having regard to this, is it reasonable to expect that the Brahmins
will ever consent to lead a movement the ultimate result of which is to
destroy the power and prestige of the Brahmin Caste ? Is it reasonable to
expect the secular Brahmins to take part in a movement directed against
the priestly Brahmins ? In my judgment, it is useless to make a distinction
between the secular Brahmins and priestly Brahmins. Both are kith and
kin. They are two arms of the same body and one bound to fight for the
existence of the other. In this connection, I am reminded of some very pregnant
remarks made by Prof. Dicey in his English Constitution. Speaking of the
actual limitation on the legislative supremacy of Parliament, Dicey says :
“The actual exercise of authority by any sovereign whatever, and notably
by Parliament, is bounded or controlled by two limitations. Of these the one
is an external, and the other is an internal limitation. The external limit
to the real power of a sovereign consists in the possibility or certainty that
his subjects or a large number of them will disobey or resist his laws. . .
The internal limit to the exercise of sovereignty arises from the nature of
the sovereign power itself. Even a despot exercises his powers in accordance
with his character, which is itself moulded by the circumstance under which
he lives, including under that head the moral feelings of the time and the
society to which he belongs. The Sultan could not, if he would, change the
religion of the Mohammedan world, but even if he could do so, it is in the
very highest degree improbable that the head of Mohammedanism should wish
to overthrow the religion of Mohammed ; the internal check on the exercise
of the Sultan’s power is at least as strong as the external limitation. People
sometimes ask the idle question, why the Pope does not introduce this or
that reform ? The true answer is that a revolutionist is not the kind of man
who becomes a Pope and that a man who becomes a Pope has no wish to
be a revolutionist.” I think, these remarks apply equally to the Brahmins
of India and one can say with equal truth that if a man who becomes a
Pope has no wish to become a revolutionary, a man who is born a Brahmin has much less desire to become a revolutionary. Indeed, to expect a Brahmin
to be a revolutionary in matters of social reform is as idle as to expect the
British Parliament, as was said by Leslie Stephen, to pass an Act requiring
all blue-eyed babies to be murdered.
Some of you will say that it is a matter of small concern whether the
Brahmins come forward to lead the movement against Caste or whether
they do not. To take this view is in my judgment to ignore the part played
by the intellectual class in the community. Whether you accept the theory
of the great man as the maker of history or whether you do not, this much
you will have to concede that in every country the intellectual class is the
most influential class, if not the governing class. The intellectual class is
the class which can foresee, it is the class which can advise and give lead.
In no country does the mass of the people live the life of intelligent thought
and action. It is largely imitative and follows the intellectual class. There
is no exaggeration in saying that the entire destiny of a country depends
upon its intellectual class. If the intellectual class is honest, independent and
disinterested it can be trusted to take the initiative and give a proper lead
when a crisis arises. It is true that intellect by itself is no virtue. It is only
a means and the use of means depends upon the ends which an intellectual
person pursues. An intellectual man can be a good man but he can easily be
a rogue. Similarly an intellectual class may be a band of high-souled persons,
ready to help, ready to emancipate erring humanity or it may easily be a
gang of crooks or a body of advocates of a narrow clique from which it draws
its support. You may think it a pity that the intellectual class in India is
simply another name for the Brahmin caste. You may regret that the two
are one ; that the existence of the intellectual class should be bound with
one single caste, that this intellectual class should share the interest and the
aspirations of that Brahmin caste, which has regarded itself the custodian
of the interest of that caste, rather than of the interests of the country. All
this may be very regrettable. But the fact remains, that the Brahmins form
the intellectual class of the Hindus. It is not only an intellectual class but
it is a class which is held in great reverence by the rest of the Hindus. The
Hindus are taught that the Brahmins are Bhudevas (Gods on earth). The Hindus are taught that Brahmins alone can be their teachers.
Manu says, “If it be asked how it should be with respect to points of the
Dharma which have not been specially mentioned, the answer is that which
Brahmins who are Shishthas propound shall doubtless have legal force.”
When such an intellectual class, which holds the rest of the community
in its grip, is opposed to the reform of Caste, the chances of success in a
movement for the break-up of the Caste system appear to me very, very remote. The second reason, why I say the task is impossible, will be clear if
you will bear in mind that the Caste system has two aspects. In one of its
aspects, it divides men into separate communities. In its second aspect, it
places these communities in a graded order one above the other in social
status. Each caste takes its pride and its consolation in the fact that in the
scale of castes it is above some other caste. As an outward mark of this
gradation, there is also a gradation of social and religious rights technically
spoken of an Ashta-dhikaras and Sanskaras. The higher the grade of a caste,
the greater the number of these rights and the lower the grade, the lesser
their number. Now this gradation, this scaling of castes, makes it impossible
to organise a common front against the Caste System. If a caste claims
the right to inter-dine and inter-marry with another caste placed above it,
it is frozen, instantly it is told by mischief-mongers, and there are many
Brahmins amongst such mischief-mongers, that it will have to concede interdining and inter-marriage with castes below it! All are slaves of the Caste
System. But all the slaves are not equal in status. To excite the proletariat
to bring about an economic revolution, Karl Marx told them : “You have
nothing to lose except your chains.” But the artful way in which the social
and religious rights are distributed among the different castes whereby
some have more and some have less, makes the slogan of Karl Marx quite
useless to excite the Hindus against the Caste System. Castes form a graded
system of sovereignties, high and low, which are jealous of their status and
which know that if a general dissolution came, some of them stand to lose
more of their prestige and power than others do. You cannot, therefore, have
a general mobilization of the Hindus, to use a military expression, for an
attack on the Caste System.
Can you appeal to reason and ask the Hindus to discard Caste as being
contrary to reason ? That raises the question : Is a Hindu free to follow his
reason ? Manu has laid down three sanctions to which every Hindu must
conform in the matter of his behaviour Here there is no place for reason to play its part. A Hindu must follow either
Veda, Smriti or Sadachar. He cannot follow anything else. In the first place
how are the texts of the Vedas and Smritis to be interpreted whenever any
doubt arises regarding their meaning ? On this important question the view
of Manu is quite definite.
According to this rule, rationalism as a canon of interpreting the Vedas and
Smritis, is absolutely condemned. It is regarded to be as wicked as atheism and
the punishment provided for it is ex-communication. Thus, where a matter is
covered by the Veda or the Smriti, a Hindu cannot resort to rational thinking.
Even when there is a conflict between Vedas and Smritis on matters on which they have given a positive injunction, the solution is not left to reason. When
there is a conflict between two Shrutis, both are to be regarded as of equal
authority. Either of them may be followed. No attempt is to be made to find
out which of the two accords with reason. This is made clear by Manu
“When there is a conflict between Shruti and Smriti, the Shruti must
prevail.” But here too, no attempt must be made to find out which of the
two accords with reason.
Again, when there is a conflict between two Smritis, the Manu-Smriti
must prevail, but no attempt is to be made to find out which of the two
accords with reason. This is the ruling given by Brihaspati.
It is, therefore, clear that in any matter on which the Shrutis and Smritis
have given a positive direction, a Hindu is not free to use his reasoning
faculty. The same rule is laid down in the Mahabharat.
He must abide by their directions. The Caste and Varna are matters,
which are dealt with by the Vedas and the Smritis and consequently, appeal
to reason can have no effect on a Hindu. So far as Caste and Varna are
concerned, not only the Shastras do not permit the Hindu to use his reason
in the decision of the question, but they have taken care to see that no
occasion is left to examine in a rational way the foundations of his belief
in Caste and Varna. It must be a source of silent amusement to many
a Non-Hindu to find hundreds and thousands of Hindus breaking Caste
on certain occasions, such as railway journey and foreign travel and yet
endeavouring to maintain Caste for the rest of their lives! The explanation
of this phenomenon discloses another fetter on the reasoning faculties of
the Hindus. Man’s life is generally habitual and unreflective. Reflective
thought, in the sense of active, persistent and careful consideration of any
belief or supposed form or knowledge in the light of the grounds that support
it and further conclusions to which it tends, is quite rare and arises only
in a situation which presents a dilemma—a crisis. Railway journeys and
foreign travels are really occasions of crisis in the life of a Hindu and it is
natural to expect a Hindu to ask himself why he should maintain Caste
at all, if he cannot maintain it at all times. But he does not. He breaks
Caste at one step and proceeds to observe it at the next without raising
any question. The reason for this astonishing conduct is to be found in
the rule of the Shastras, which directs him to maintain Caste as far as possible and to undergo prayaschitta when he cannot. By this theory of
prayaschitta, the Shastras by following a spirit of compromise have given
caste a perpetual lease of life and have smothered reflective thought which
would have otherwise led to the destruction of the notion of Caste.
There have been many who have worked in the cause of the abolition
of Caste and Untouchability. Of those, who can be mentioned, Ramanuja,
Kabir and others stand out prominently. Can you appeal to the acts of these
reformers and exhort the Hindus to follow them ? It is true that Manu has
included Sadachar (lnkpkj) as one of the sanctions along with Shruti and
Smriti. Indeed, Sadachar has been given a higher place than Shastras.
According to this, Sadachar, whether, it is /E;Z or v/E;Z in accordance
with Shastras or contrary to Shastras, must be followed. But what is the
meaning of Sadachar ? If any one were to suppose that Sadachar means
right or good acts i.e. acts of good and righteous men he would find himself
greatly mistaken. Sadachar does not means good acts or acts of good men.
It means ancient custom good or bad.
As though to warn people against the view that Sadachar means good
acts or acts of good men and fearing that people might understand it
that way and follow the acts of good men, the Smritis have commanded
the Hindus in unmistakable terms not to follow even Gods in their good
deeds, if they are contrary to Shruti, Smriti and Sadachar. This may
sound to be most extraordinary, most perverse, but the fact remains that
u nsopfjra pjsr~ is an injunction, issued to the Hindus by their Shastras.
Reason and morality are the two most powerful weapons in the armoury
of a Reformer. To deprive him of the use of these weapons is to disable
him for action. How are you going to break up Caste, if people are not
free to consider whether it accords with reason ? How are you going to
break up Caste it people are not free to consider whether it accords with
morality ? The wall built around Caste is impregnable and the material,
of which it is built, contains none of the combustible stuff of reason and
morality. Add to this the fact that inside this wall stands the army of
Brahmins who form the intellectual class, Brahmins who are the natural
leaders of the Hindus, Brahmins who are there not as mere mercenary
soldiers but as an army fighting for its homeland and you will get an
idea why I think that breaking-up of Caste amongst the Hindus is wellnigh impossible. At any rate, it would take ages before a breach is made.
But whether the doing of the deed takes time or whether it can be done
quickly, you must not forget that if you wish to bring about a breach in the system then you have got to apply the dynamite to the Vedas and the
Shastras, which deny any part to reason, to Vedas and Shastras, which deny
any part to morality. You must destroy the Religion of the Shrutis and the
Smritis. Nothing else will avail. This is my considered view of the matter.
Some may not understand what I mean by destruction of Religion ; some
may find the idea revolting to them and some may find it revolutionary.
Let me therefore explain my position. I do not know whether you draw
a distinction between principles and rules. But I do. Not only I make a
distinction but I say that this distinction is real and important. Rules are
practical; they are habitual ways of doing things according to prescription.
But principles are intellectual; they are useful methods of judging things.
Rules seek to tell an agent just what course of action to pursue. Principles
do not prescribe a specific course of action. Rules, like cooking recipes, do
tell just what to do and how to do it. A principle, such as that of justice,
supplies a main head by reference to which he is to consider the bearings
of his desires and purposes, it guides him in his thinking by suggesting
to him the important consideration which he should bear in mind. This
difference between rules and principles makes the acts done in pursuit of
them different in quality and in content. Doing what is said to be good by
virtue of a rule and doing good in the light of a principle are two different
things. The principle may be wrong but the act is conscious and responsible.
The rule may be right but the act is mechanical. A religious act may not
be a correct act but must at least be a responsible act. To permit of this
responsibility, Religion must mainly be a matter of principles only. It cannot
be a matter of rules. The moment it degenerates into rules it ceases to be
Religion, as it kills responsibility which is the essence of a truly religious
act. What is this Hindu Religion ? Is it a set of principles or is it a code
of rules ? Now the Hindu Religion, as contained in the Vedas and the
Smritis, is nothing but a mass of sacrificial, social, political and sanitary
rules and regulations, all mixed up. What is called Religion by the Hindus
is nothing but a multitude of commands and prohibitions. Religion, in the
sense of spiritual principles, truly universal, applicable to all races, to all
countries, to all times, is not to be found in them, and if it is, it does not
form the governing part of a Hindu’s life. That for a Hindu, Dharma means
commands and prohibitions is clear from the way the word Dharma is used
in Vedas and the Smritis and understood by the commentators. The word
Dharma as used in the Vedas in most cases means religious ordinances or
rites. Even Jaimini in his Purva-Mimansa defines Dharma as “a desirable
goal or result that is indicated by injunctive (Vedic) passages”. To put it
in plain language, what the Hindus call Religion is really Law or at best
legalized class-ethics. Frankly, I refuse to call this code of ordinances, as
Religion. The first evil of such a code of ordinances, misrepresented to the people as Religion, is that it tends to deprive moral life of freedom and
spontaneity and to reduce it (for the conscientious at any rate) to a more
or less anxious and servile conformity to externally imposed rules. Under
it, there is no loyalty to ideals, there is only conformity to commands. But
the worst evil of this code of ordinances is that the laws it contains must
be the same yesterday, today and forever. They are iniquitous in that they
are not the same for one class as for another. But this iniquity is made
perpetual in that they are prescribed to be the same for all generations. The
objectionable part of such a scheme is not that they are made by certain
persons called Prophets or Law-givers. The objectionable part is that this
code has been invested with the character of finality and fixity. Happiness
notoriously varies with the conditions and circumstances of a person, as well
as with the conditions of different people and epochs. That being the case,
how can humanity endure this code of eternal laws, without being cramped
and without being crippled ? I have, therefore, no hesitation in saying that
such a religion must be destroyed and I say, there is nothing irreligious in
working for the destruction of such a religion. Indeed I hold that it is your
bounden duty to tear the mask, to remove the misrepresentation that as
caused by misnaming this Law as Religion. This is an essential step for you.
Once you clear the minds of the people of this misconception and enable
them to realize that what they are told as Religion is not Religion but that
it is really Law, you will be in a position to urge for its amendment or
abolition. So long as people look upon it as Religion they will not be ready
for a change, because the idea of Religion is generally speaking not associated
with the idea of change. But the idea of law is associated with the idea of
change and when people come to know that what is called Religion is really
Law, old and archaic, they will be ready for a change, for people know and
accept that law can be changed.
While I condemn a Religion of Rules, I must not be understood to hold
the opinion that there is no necessity for a religion. On the contrary, I agree
with Burke when he says that, “True religion is the foundation of society,
the basis on which all true Civil Government rests, and both their sanction.”
Consequently, when I urge that these ancient rules of life be annulled, I
am anxious that its place shall be taken by a Religion of Principles, which
alone can lay claim to being a true Religion. Indeed, I am so convinced of the
necessity of Religion that I feel I ought to tell you in outline what I regard as
necessary items in this religious reform. The following in my opinion should
be the cardinal items in this reform : (1) There should be one and only one
standard book of Hindu Religion, acceptable to all Hindus and recognized by
all Hindus. This of course means that all other books of Hindu religion such as
Vedas, Shastras and Puranas, which are treated as sacred and authoritative,
must by law cease to be so and the preaching of any doctrine, religious or social contained in these books should be penalized. (2) It should be better if
priesthood among Hindus was abolished. But as this seems to be impossible,
the priesthood must at least cease to be hereditary. Every person who professes
to be a Hindu must be eligible for being a priest. It should be provided by
law that no Hindu shall be entitled to be a priest unless he has passed
an examination prescribed by the State and holds a sanad from the State
permitting him to practise. (3) No ceremony performed by a priest who does
not hold a sanad shall be deemed to be valid in law and it should be made
penal for a person who has no sanad to officiate as a priest. (4) A priest
should be the servant of the State and should be subject to the disciplinary
action by the State in the matter of his morals, beliefs and worship, in
addition to his being subject along with other citizens to the ordinary law
of the land. (5) The number of priests should be limited by law according to
the requirements of the State as is done in the case of the I.C.S. To some,
this may sound radical. But to my mind there is nothing revolutionary in
this. Every profession in India is regulated. Engineers must show proficiency,
Doctor must show proficiency, Lawyers must show proficiency, before they
are allowed to practise their professions. During the whole of their career,
they must not only obey the law of the land, civil as well as criminal, but
they must also obey the special code of morals prescribed by their respective
professions. The priest’s is the only profession where proficiency is not
required. The profession of a Hindu priest is the only profession which is not
subject to any code. Mentally a priest may be an idiot, physically a priest
may be suffering from a foul disease, such as syphilis or gonorrhea, morally
he may be a wreck. But he is fit to officiate at solemn ceremonies, to enter
the sanctum sanctorum of a Hindu temple and worship the Hindu God. All
this becomes possible among the Hindus because for a priest it is enough
to be born in a priestly caste. The whole thing is abominable and is due to
the fact that the priestly class among Hindus is subject neither to law nor
to morality. It recognizes no duties. It knows only of rights and privileges.
It is a pest which divinity seems to have let loose on the masses for their
mental and moral degradation. The priestly class must be brought under
control by some such legislation as I have outlined above. It will prevent it
from doing mischief and from misguiding people. It will democratise it by
throwing it open to every one. It will certainly help to kill the Brahminism
and will also help to kill Caste, which is nothing but Brahminism incarnate.
Brahminism is the poison which has spoiled Hinduism. You will succeed in
saving Hinduism if you will kill Brahminism. There should be no opposition
to this reform from any quarter. It should be welcomed even by the Arya
Samajists, because this is merely an application of their own doctrine of
guna-karma.
Whether you do that or you do not, you must give a new doctrinal basis
to your Religion—a basis that will be in consonance with Liberty, Equality
and Fraternity, in short, with Democracy. I am no authority on the subject.
But I am told that for such religious principles as will be in consonance
with Liberty, Equality and Fraternity it may not be necessary for you to
borrow from foreign sources and that you could draw for such principles on
the Upanishads. Whether you could do so without a complete remoulding, a
considerable scraping and chipping off the ore they contain, is more than I
can say. This means a complete change in the fundamental notions of life. It
means a complete change in the values of life. It means a complete change
in outlook and in attitude towards men and things. It means conversion ;
but if you do not like the word, I will say, it means new life. But a new life
cannot enter a body that is dead. New life can enter only in a new body.
The old body must die before a new body can come into existence and a new
life can enter into it. To put it simply, the old must cease to be operative
before the new can begin to enliven and to pulsate. This is what I meant
when I said you must discard the authority of the Shastras and destroy the
religion of the Shastras.