SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TYPE: Political and Social Essay
I have kept you too long. It is time I brought this address to a close.
This would have been a convenient point for me to have stopped. But this
would probably be my last address to a Hindu audience on a subject vitally
concerning the Hindus. I would therefore like, before I close, to place before
the Hindus, if they will allow me, some questions which I regard as vital
and invite them seriously to consider the same.
In the first place, the Hindus must consider whether it is sufficient to
take the placid view of the anthropologist that there is nothing to be said
about the beliefs, habits, morals and outlooks on life, which obtain among
the different peoples of the world except that they often differ ; or whether
it is not necessary to make an attempt to find out what kind of morality,
beliefs, habits and outlook have worked best and have enabled those who
possessed them to flourish, to go strong, to people the earth and to have
dominion over it. As is observed by Prof. Carver, “Morality and religion, as
the organised expression of moral approval and disapproval, must be regarded
as factors in the struggle for existence as truly as are weapons for offence
and defence, teeth and claws, horns and hoofs, furs and feathers. The social
group, community, tribe or nation, which develops an unworkable scheme of
morality or within which those social acts which weaken it and unfit it for
survival, habitually create the sentiment of approval, while those which would
strengthen and enable it to be expanded habitually create the sentiment
of disapproval, will eventually be eliminated. It is its habits of approval or
disapproval (these are the results of religion and morality) that handicap it,
as really as the possession of two wings on one side with none on the other
will handicap the colony of flies. It would be as futile in the one case as in
the other to argue, that one system is just as good as another.” Morality and religion, therefore, are not mere matters of likes and dislikes. You may
dislike exceedingly a scheme of morality, which, if universally practised
within a nation, would make that nation the strongest nation on the face
of the earth. Yet in spite of your dislike such a nation will become strong.
You may like exceedingly a scheme of morality and an ideal of justice, which
if universally practised within a nation, would make it unable to hold its
own in the struggle with other nations. Yet in spite of your admiration this
nation will eventually disappear. The Hindus must, therefore, examine their
religion and their morality in terms of their survival value.
Secondly, the Hindus must consider whether they should conserve the
whole of their social heritage or select what is helpful and transmit to
future generations only that much and no more. Prof. John Dewey, who
was my teacher and to whom I owe so much, has said : “Every society gets
encumbered with what is trivial, with dead wood from the past, and with
what is positively perverse... As a society becomes more enlightened, it
realizes that it is responsible not to conserve and transmit the whole of its
existing achievements, but only such as make for a better future society.”
Even Burke, in spite of the vehemence with which he opposed the principle
of change embodied in the French Revolution, was compelled to admit that
“a State without the means of some change is without the means of its
conservation. Without such means it might even risk the loss of that part
of the constitution which it wished the most religiously to preserve.” What
Burke said of a State applies equally to a society.
Thirdly, the Hindus must consider whether they must not cease to worship
the past as supplying its ideals. The beneful effect of this worship of the past
are best summed up by Prof. Dewey when he says : “An individual can live
only in the present. The present is not just something which comes after the
past; much less something produced by it. It is what life is in leaving the
past behind it. The study of past products will not help us to understand
the present. A knowledge of the past and its heritage is of great significance
when it enters into the present, but not otherwise. And the mistake of making
the records and remains of the past the main material of education is that
it tends to make the past a rival of the present and the present a more or
less futile imitation of the past.” The principle, which makes little of the
present act of living and growing, naturally looks upon the present as empty
and upon the future as remote. Such a principle is inimical to progress and
is an hindrance to a strong and a steady current of life.
Fourthly, the Hindus must consider whether the time has not come for
them to recognize that there is nothing fixed, nothing eternal, nothing
sanatan; that everything is changing, that change is the law of life for
individuals as well as for society. In a changing society, there must be a
constant revolution of old values and the Hindus must realize that if there must be standards to measure the acts of men there must also be a readiness
to revise those standards.
I have to confess that this address has become too lengthy. Whether this
fault is compensated to any extent by breadth or depth is a matter for you
to judge. All I claim is to have told you candidly my views. I have little to
recommend them but some study and a deep concern in your destiny. If you
will allow me to say, these views are the views of a man, who has been no
tool of power, no flatterer of greatness. They come from one, almost the whole
of whose public exertion has been one continuous struggle for liberty for the
poor and for the oppressed and whose only reward has been a continuous
shower of calumny and abuse from national journals and national leaders,
for no other reason except that I refuse to join with them in performing the
miracle—I will not say trick—of liberating the oppressed with the gold of
the tyrant and raising the poor with the cash of the rich. All this may not
be enough to commend my views. I think they are not likely to alter yours.
But whether they do or do not, the responsibility is entirely yours. You must
make your efforts to uproot Caste, if not in my way, then in your way. I am
sorry, I will not be with you. I have decided to change. This is not the place
for giving reasons. But even when I am gone out of your fold, I will watch
your movement with active sympathy and you will have my assistance for
what it may be worth. Yours is a national cause. Caste is no doubt primarily
the breath of the Hindus. But the Hindus have fouled the air all over and
everybody is infected, Sikh, Muslim and Christian. You, therefore, deserve
the support of all those who are suffering from this infection, Sikh, Muslim
and Christian. Yours is more difficult than the other national cause, namely
Swaraj. In the fight for Swaraj you fight with the whole nation on your side.
In this, you have to fight against the whole nation and that too, your own.
But it is more important than Swaraj. There is no use having Swaraj, if
you cannot defend it. More important than the question of defending Swaraj
is the question of defending the Hindus under the Swaraj. In my opinion
only when the Hindu Society becomes a casteless society that it can hope
to have strength enough to defend itself. Without such internal strength,
Swaraj for Hindus may turn out to be only a step towards slavery. Good-bye
and good wishes for your success.