SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TYPE: Political and Social Essay
Not only has the Hindu made no effort for the humanitarian cause of
civilizing the savages but the higher-caste Hindus have deliberately prevented
the lower castes who are within the pale of Hinduism from rising to the
cultural level of the higher castes. I will give two instances, one of the Sonars
and the other of the Pathare Prabhus. Both are communities quite well-known
in Maharashtra. Like the rest of the communities desiring to raise their
status these two communities were at one time endeavouring to adopt some
of the ways and habits of the Brahmins. The Sonars were styling themselves
Daivadnya Brahmins and were wearing their “dhotis” with folds on and using
the word namaskar for salutation. Both, the folded way of wearing the “dhoti”
and the namaskar were special to the Brahmins. The Brahmins did not like
this imitation and this attempt by Sonars to pass off as Brahmins. Under the
authority of the Peshwas the Brahmins successfully put down this attempt
on the part of the Sonars to adopt the ways of the Brahmins. They even
got the President of the Councils of the East India Company’s settlement in
Bombay to issue a prohibitory order against the Sonars residing in Bombay.
At one time the Pathare Prabhus had widow-remarriage as a custom of their caste. This custom of widow-remarriage was later on looked upon as a mark
of social inferiority by some members of the caste especially because it was
contrary to the custom prevalent among the Brahmins. With the object of
raising the status of their community some Pathare Prabhus sought to stop
this practice of widow-remarriage that was prevalent in their caste. The
community was divided into two camps, one for and the other against the
innovation. The Peshwas took the side of those in favour of widow-remarriage
and thus virtually prohibited the Pathare Prabhus from following the ways
of the Brahmins. The Hindus criticise the Mohammedans for having spread
their religion by the use of the sword. They also ridicule Christianity on the
score of the inquisition. But really speaking who is better and more worthy
of our respect—the Mohammedans and Christians who attempted to thrust
down the throats of unwilling persons what they regarded as necessary for
their salvation or the Hindu who would not spread the light, who would
endeavour to keep others in darkness, who would not consent to share his
intellectual and social inheritance with those who are ready and willing to
make it a part of their own make-up ? I have no hesitation in saying that if
the Mohammedan has been cruel the Hindu has been mean and meanness
is worse than cruelty.
Whether the Hindu religion was or was not a missionary religion has been a
controversial issue. Some hold the view that it was never a missionary religion.
Others hold that it was. That the Hindu religion was once a missionary
religion must be admitted. It could not have spread over the face of India,
if it was not a missionary religion. That today it is not a missionary religion
is also a fact which must be accepted. The question therefore is not whether
or not the Hindu religion was a missionary religion. The real question is
why did the Hindu religion cease to be a missionary religion ? My answer
is this. Hindu religion ceased to be a missionary religion when the Caste
System grew up among the Hindus. Caste is inconsistent with conversion.
Inculcation of beliefs and dogmas is not the only problem that is involved in
conversion. To find a place for the convert in the social life of the community
is another and a much more important problem that arises in connection with
conversion. That problem is where to place the convert, in what caste ? It is
a problem which must baffle every Hindu wishing to make aliens converts
to his religion. Unlike the club the membership of a caste is not open to
all and sundry. The law of caste confines its membership to person bom in
the caste. Castes are autonomous and there is no authority anywhere to
compel a caste to admit a new-comer to its social life. Hindu Society being
a collection of castes and each caste being a close corporation there is no
place for a convert. Thus it is the caste which has prevented the Hindus from
expanding and from absorbing other religious communities. So long as caste remain, Hindu religion cannot be made a missionary religion and Shudhi will be both a folly and a futility.
The reasons which have made Shudhi impossible for Hindus are also
responsible for making Sanghatan impossible. The idea underlying Sanghatan
is to remove from the mind of the Hindu that timidity and cowardice which
so painfully make him off from the Mohammedan and the Sikh and which
have led him to adopt the low ways of treachery and cunning for protecting
himself. The question naturally arises : From where does the Sikh or the
Mohammedan derive his strength which makes him brave and fearless ? I am
sure it is not due to relative superiority of physical strength, diet or drill. It
is due to the strength arising out of the feeling that all Sikhs will come to the
rescue of a Sikh when he is in danger and that all Mohammedans will rush
to save a Muslim if he is attacked. The Hindu can derive no such strength.
He cannot feel assured that his fellows will come to his help. Being one and
fated to be alone he remains powerless, develops timidity and cowardice and
in a fight surrenders or runs away. The Sikh as well as the Muslim stands
fearless and gives battle because he knows that though one he will not be
alone. The presence of this belief in the one helps him to hold out and the
absence of it in the other makes him to give way. If you pursue this matter
further and ask what is it that enables the Sikh and the Mohammedan to
feel so assured and why is the Hindu filled with such despair in the matter
of help and assistance you will find that the reasons for this difference lie in
the difference in their associated mode of living. The associated mode of life
practised by the Sikhs and the Mohammedans produces fellow-feeling. The
associated mode of life of the Hindus does not. Among Sikhs and Muslims
there is a social cement which makes them Bhais. Among Hindus there is
no such cement and one Hindu does not regard another Hindu as his Bhai.
This explains why a Sikh says and feels that one Sikh, or one Khalsa is
equal to Sava Lakh men. This explains why one Mohammedan is equal to
a crowd of Hindus. This difference is undoubtedly a difference due to caste.
So long as caste remains, there will be no Sanghatan and so long as there
is no Sanghatan the Hindu will remain weak and meek. The Hindus claim
to be a very tolerant people. In my opinion this is a mistake. On many
occasions they can be intolerant and if on some occasions they are tolerant
that is because they are too weak to oppose or too indifferent to oppose.
This indifference of the Hindus has become so much a part of their nature
that a Hindu will quite meekly tolerate an insult as well as a wrong. You
see amongst them, to use the words of Morris, “The great reading down the
little, the strong heating down the weak, cruel men fearing not, kind men
daring not and wise men caring not.” With the Hindu Gods all forbearing,
it is not difficult to imagine the pitiable condition of the wronged and the oppressed among the Hindus. Indifferentism is the worst kind of disease
that can infect a people. Why is the Hindu so indifferent ? In my opinion
this indifferentism is the result of Caste System which has made Sanghatan
and co-operation even for a good cause impossible.
The assertion by the individual of his own opinions and beliefs, his own
independence and interest as over against group standards, group authority
and group interests is the beginning of all reform. But whether the reform
will continue depends upon what scope the group affords for such individual
assertion. If the group is tolerant and fair-minded in dealing with such
individuals they will continue to assert and in the end succeed in converting
their fellows. On the other hand if the group is intolerant and does not
bother about the means it adopts to stifle such individuals they will perish
and the reform will die out. New a caste has an unquestioned right to
excommunicate any man who is guilty of breaking the rules of the caste
and when it is realized that excommunication involves a complete cesser
of social intercourse it will be agreed that as a form of punishment there
is really little to choose between excommunication and death. No wonder
individual Hindus have not had the courage to assert their independence
by breaking the barriers of caste. It is true that man cannot get on with
his fellows. But it is also true that he cannot do without them. He would
like to have the society of his fellows on his terms. If he cannot get it on
his terms then he will be ready to have it on any terms even amounting to
complete surrender. This is because he cannot do without society. A caste is
ever ready to take advantage of the helplessness of a man and insist upon
complete conformity to its code in letter and in spirit. A caste can easily
organize itself into a conspiracy to make the life of a reformer a hell and if
a conspiracy is a crime I do not understand why such a nefarious act as an
attempt to excommunicate a person for daring to act contrary to the rules
of caste should not be made an offence punishable in law. But as it is, even
law gives each caste an autonomy to regulate its membership and punish
dissenters with excommunication. Caste in the hands of the orthodox has
been a powerful weapon for persecuting the reforms and for killing all reform.
The effect of caste on the ethics of the Hindus is simply deplorable. Caste
has killed public spirit. Caste has destroyed the sense of public charity.
Caste has made public opinion impossible. A Hindu’s public is his caste. His
responsibility is only to his caste. His loyalty is restricted only to his caste.
Virtue has become caste-ridden and morality has become caste-bound. There
is no sympathy to the deserving. There is no appreciation of the meritorious.
There is no charity to the needy. Suffering as such calls for no response.
There is charity but it begins with the caste and ends with the caste. There is sympathy but not for men of other caste. Would a Hindu acknowledge
and follow the leadership of a great and good man? The case of a Mahatma
apart, the answer must be that he will follow a leader if he is a man of his
caste. A Brahmin will follow a leader only if he is a Brahmin, a Kayastha
if he is a Kayastha and so on. The capacity to appreciate merits in a man
apart from his caste does not exist in a Hindu. There is appreciation of
virtue but only when the man is a fellow caste-man. The whole morality
is as bad as tribal morality. My caste-man, right or wrong; my caste-man,
good or bad. It is not a case of standing by virtue and not standing by
vice. It is a case of standing or not standing by the caste. Have not Hindus
committed treason against their country in the interests of their caste ?