SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TYPE: Political and Social Essay
Some have dug a biological trench in defence of the Caste System. It is
said that the object of Caste was to preserve purity of race and purity of
blood. Now ethnologists are of opinion that men of pure race exist nowhere
and that there has been a mixture of all races in all parts of the world.
Especially is this the case with the people of India. Mr. D. R. Bhandarkar
in his paper on Foreign Elements in the Hindu Population has stated that
“There is hardly a class, or Caste in India which has not a foreign strain
in it. There is an admixture of alien blood not only among the warrior
classes—the Rajputs and the Marathas—but also among the Brahmins who
are under the happy delusion that they are free from all foreign elements.”
The Caste system cannot be said to have grown as a means of preventing the
admixture of races or as a means of maintaining purity of blood. As a matter
of fact Caste system came into being long after the different races of India
had commingled in blood and culture. To hold that distinctions of Castes or
really distinctions of race and to treat different Castes as though they were
so many different races is a gross perversion of facts. What racial affinity is there between the Brahmin of the Punjab and the Brahmin of Madras ?
What racial affinity is there between the untouchable of Bengal and the
untouchable of Madras? What racial difference is there between the Brahmin
of the Punjab and the Chamar of the Punjab ? What racial difference is there
between the Brahmin of Madras and the Pariah of Madras ? The Brahmin
of the Punjab is racially of the same stock as the Chamar of the Punjab and
the Brahmin of Madras is of the same race as the Pariah of Madras. Caste
system does not demarcate racial division. Caste system is a social division of
people of the same race. Assuming it, however, to be a case of racial divisions
one may ask : What harm could there be if a mixture of races and of blood
was permitted to take place in India by intermarriages between different
Castes ? Men are no doubt divided from animals by so deep a distinction
that science recognizes men and animals as two distinct species. But even
scientists who believe in purity of races do not assert that the different races
constitute different species of men. They are only varieties of one and the
same species. As such they can interbreed and produce an offspring which
is capable of breeding and which is not sterile. An immense lot of nonsense
is talked about heredity and eugenics in defence of the Caste System. Few
would object to the Caste System if it was in accord with the basic principle
of eugenics because few can object to the improvement of the race by judicious
mating. But one fails to understand how the Caste System secures judicious
mating. Caste System is a negative thing. It merely prohibits persons
belonging to different Castes from intermarrying. It is not a positive method
of selecting which two among a given Caste should marry. If Caste is eugenic
in origin then the origin of sub-Castes must also be eugenic. But can any one
seriously maintain that the origin of sub-Castes is eugenic ? I think it would
be absurd to contend for such a proposition and for a very obvious reason.
If Caste means race then differences of sub-Castes cannot mean differences
of race because sub-Castes become ex hypothesia sub-divisions of one and
the same race. Consequently the bar against intermarrying and interdining
between sub-Castes cannot be for the purpose of maintaining purity of race
or of blood. If sub-Castes cannot be eugenic in origin there cannot be any
substance in the contention that Caste is eugenic in origin. Again if Caste
is eugenic in origin one can understand the bar against intermarriage. But
what is the purpose of the interdict placed on interdining between Castes
and sub-Castes alike ? Interdining cannot infect blood and therefore cannot
be the cause either of the improvement or of deterioration of the race. This
shows that Caste has no scientific origin and that those who are attempting
to give it an eugenic basis are trying to support by science what is grossly
unscientific. Even today eugenics cannot become a practical possibility unless
we have definite knowledge regarding the laws of heredity. Prof. Batcson in
his Mendel’s Principles of Heredity says, “There is nothing in the descent of
the higher mental qualities to suggest that they follow any single system of transmission. It is likely that both they and the more marked developments
of physical powers result rather from the coincidence of numerous factors
than from the possession of any one genetic element.” To argue that the
Caste System was eugenic in its conception is to attribute to the forefathers
of present-day Hindus a knowledge of heredity which even the modern
scientists do not possess. A tree should be judged by the fruits it yields.
If caste is eugenic what sort of a race of men it should have produced ?
Physically speaking the Hindus are a C3
 people. They are a race of Pygmies
and dwarfs stunted in stature and wanting in stamina. It is a nation 9/10ths
of which is declared to be unfit for military service. This shows that the
Caste System does not embody the eugenics of modern scientists. It is a
social system which embodies the arrogance and selfishness of a perverse
section of the Hindus who were superior enough in social status to set it in
fashion and who had authority to force it on their inferiors.
Caste does not result in economic efficiency. Caste cannot and has not
improved the race. Caste has however done one thing. It has completely
disorganized and demoralized the Hindus.
The first and foremost thing that must be recognized is that Hindu Society
is a myth. The name Hindu is itself a foreign name. It was given by the
Mohammedans to the natives for the purpose of distinguishing themselves.
It does not occur in any Sanskrit work prior to the Mohammedan invasion.
They did not feel the necessity of a common name because they had no
conception of their having constituted a community. Hindu society as such
does not exist. It is only a collection of castes. Each caste is conscious of its
existence. Its survival is the be all and end all of its existence. Castes do not
even form a federation. A caste has no feeling that it is affiliated to other
castes except when there is a Hindu-Muslim riot. On all other occasions each
caste endeavours to segregate itself and to distinguish itself from other castes.
Each caste not only dines among itself and marries among itself but each
caste prescribes its own distinctive dress. What other explanation can there
be of the innumerable styles of dress worn by the men and women of India
which so amuse the tourists ? Indeed the ideal Hindu must be like a rat living
in his own hole refusing to have any contact with others. There is an utter
lack among the Hindus of what the sociologists call “consciousness of kind”.
There is no Hindu consciousness of kind. In every Hindu the consciousness
that exists is the consciousness of his caste. That is the reason why the
Hindus cannot be said to form a society or a nation. There are however many
Indians whose patriotism does not permit them to admit that Indians are
not a nation, that they are only an amorphous mass of people. They have
insisted that underlying the apparent diversity there is a fundamental unity
which marks the life of the Hindus in as much as there is a similarity of habits and customs, beliefs and thoughts which obtain all over the continent
of India. Similarity in habits and customs, beliefs and thoughts there is.
But one cannot accept the conclusion that therefore, the Hindus constitute
a society. To do so is to misunderstand the essentials which go to make up
a society. Men do not become a society by living in physical proximity any
more than a man ceases to be a member of his society by living so many
miles away from other men. Secondly similarity in habits and customs,
beliefs and thoughts is not enough to constitute men into society. Things
may be passed physically from one to another like bricks. In the same way
habits and customs, beliefs and thoughts of one group may be taken over
by another group and there may thus appear a similarity between the two.
Culture spreads by diffusion and that is why one finds similarity between
various primitive tribes in the matter of their habits and customs, beliefs
and thoughts, although they do not live in proximity. But no one could say
that because there was this similarity the primitive tribes constituted one
society. This is because similarly in certain things is not enough to constitute
a society. Men constitute a society because they have things which they
possess in common. To have similar thing is totally different from possessing
things in common. And the only way by which men can come to possess
things in common with one another is by being in communication with one
another. This is merely another way of saying that Society continues to exist
by communication indeed in communication. To make it concrete, it is not
enough if men act in a way which agrees with the acts of others. Parallel
activity, even if similar, is not sufficient to bind men into a society. This is
proved by the fact that the festivals observed by the different Castes amongst
the Hindus are the same. Yet these parallel performances of similar festivals
by the different castes have not bound them into one integral whole. For
that purpose what is necessary is for a man to share and participate in a
common activity so that the same emotions are aroused in him that animate
the others. Making the individual a sharer or partner in the associated
activity so that he feels its success as his success, its failure as his failure
is the real thing that binds men and makes a society of them. The Caste
System prevents common activity and by preventing common activity it
has prevented the Hindus from becoming a society with a unified life and
a consciousness of its own being.
The Hindus often complain of the isolation and exclusiveness of a gang or
a clique and blame them for anti-social spirit. But they conveniently forget
that this anti-social spirit is the worst feature of their own Caste System.
One caste enjoys singing a hymn of hate against another caste as much as
the Germans did in singing their hymn of hate against the English during
the last war. The literature of the Hindus is full of caste genealogies in which an attempt is made to give a noble origin to one caste and an ignoble origin
to other castes. The Sahyadrikhand is a notorious instance of this class of
literature. This anti-social spirit is not confined to caste alone. It has gone
deeper and has poisoned the mutual relations of the sub-castes as well. In
my province the Golak Brahmins, Deorukha Brahmins, Karada Brahmins,
Palshe Brahmins and Chitpavan Brahmins, all claim to be sub-divisions of
the Brahmin Caste. But the anti-social spirit that prevails between them is
quite as marked and quite as virulent as the anti-social spirit that prevails
between them and other non-Brahmin castes. There is nothing strange in
this. An anti-social spirit is found wherever one group has “interests of its
own” which shut it out from full interaction with other groups, so that its
prevailing purpose is protection of what it has got. This anti-social spirit,
this spirit of protecting its own interests is as much a marked feature of the
different castes in their isolation from one another as it is of nations in their
isolation. The Brahmin’s primary concern is to protect “his interest” against
those of the non-Brahmins and the non-Brahmin’s primary concern is to
protect their interests against those of the Brahmins. The Hindus, therefore,
are not merely an assortment of castes but they are so many warring groups
each living for itself and for its selfish ideal. There is another feature of
caste which is deplorable. The ancestors of the present-day English fought
on one side or the other in the wars of the Roses and the Cromwellian War.
But the decendents of those who fought on the one side do not bear any
animosity—any grudge against the descendents of those who fought on the
other side. The feud is forgotten. But the present-day non-Brahmins cannot
forgive the present-day Brahmins for the insult their ancestors gave to Shivaji.
The present-day Kayasthas will not forgive the present-day Brahmins for
the infamy cast upon their forefathers by the forefathers of the latter. To
what is this difference due ? Obviously to the Caste System. The existence
of Caste and Caste Consciousness has served to keep the memory of past
feuds between castes green and has prevented solidarity.
The recent discussion about the excluded and partially included areas has
served to draw attention to the position of what are called the aboriginal
tribes in India. They number about 13 millions if not more. Apart from the
questions whether their exclusion from the new Constitution is proper or
improper, the fact still remains that these aborigines have remained in their
primitive uncivilized State in a land which boasts of a civilization thousands
of years old. Not only are they not civilized but some of them follow pursuits
which have led to their being classified as criminals. Thirteen millions of
people living in the midst of civilization are still in a savage state and are
leading the life of hereditary criminals ! ! But the Hindus have never felt
ashamed of it. This is a phenomenon which in my view is quite unparalleled.
What is the cause of this shameful state of affairs ? Why has no attempt
been made to civilize these aborigines and to lead them to take to a more
honourable way of making a living ? The Hindus will probably seek to account
for this savage state of the aborigines by attributing to them congenital
stupidity. They will probably not admit that the aborigines have remained
savages because they had made no effort to civilize them, to give them
medical aid, to reform them, to make them good citizens. But supposing
a Hindu wished to do what the Christian missionary is doing for these
aborigines, could he have done it ? I submit not. Civilizing the aborigines
means adopting them as your own, living in their midst, and cultivating
fellow-feeling, in short loving them. How is it possible for a Hindu to do
this ? His whole life is one anxious effort to preserve his caste. Caste is
his precious possession which he must save at any cost. He cannot consent
to lose it by establishing contact with the aborigines the remnants of the
hateful Anaryas of the Vedic days. Not that a Hindu could not be taught
the sense of duty to fallen humanity, but the trouble is that no amount of
sense of duty can enable him to overcome his duty to preserve his caste.
Caste is, therefore, the real explanation as to why the Hindu has let the
savage remain a savage in the midst of his civilization without blushing
or without feeling any sense of remorse or repentance. The Hindu has not
realized that these aborigines are a source of potential danger. If these
savages remain savages they may not do any harm to the Hindus. But if
they are reclaimed by non-Hindus and converted to their faiths they will
swell the ranks of the enemies of the Hindus. If this happens the Hindu
will have to thank himself and his Caste System.