SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
CONTEXT: Ambedkar responds to Mahatma Gandhi’s critique of his original speech “Annihilation of Caste” published in Harijan and letters. 
The argument of the Mahatma that Hinduism would be tolerable if only
many were to follow the example of the saints is fallacious for another
reason. By citing the names of such illustrious persons as Chaitanya etc.
what the Mahatma seems to me to suggest in its broadest and simplest
form is that Hindu society can be made tolerable and even happy without
any fundamental change in its structure if all the high caste Hindus can be
persuaded to follow a high standard of morality in their dealings with the
low caste Hindus. I am totally opposed to this kind of ideology. I can respect
those of the caste Hindus who try to realize a high social ideal in their life.
Without such men India would be an uglier and a less happy place to live
in than it is. But nonetheless anyone who relies on an attempt to turn the
members of the caste Hindus into better men by improving their personal
character is in my judgment wasting his energy and hugging an illusion.
Can personal character make the maker of armaments a good man, i.e. a
man who will sell shells that will not burst and gas that will not poison ?
If it cannot, how can you accept personal character to make a man loaded
with the consciousness of Caste, a good man, i.e. a man who would treat his
fellows as his friends and equals ? To be true to himself he must deal with
his fellows either as a superior or inferior according as the case may be; at
any rate, differently from his own caste fellows. He can never be expected
to deal with his fellows as his kinsmen and equals. As a matter of fact, a
Hindu does treat all those who are not of his Caste as though they were
aliens, who could be discriminated against with impunity and against whom
any fraud or trick may be practised without shame. This is to say that there
can be a better or a worse Hindu. But a good Hindu there cannot be. This
is so not because there is anything wrong with his personal character. In
fact what is wrong is the entire basis of his relationship to his fellows. The
best of men cannot be moral if the basis of relationship between them and
their fellows is fundamentally a wrong relationship. To a slave his master
may be better or worse. But there cannot be a good master. A good man
cannot be a master and a master cannot be a good man. The same applies
to the relationship between high caste and low caste. To a low caste man
a high caste man can be better or worse as compared to other high caste
men. A high caste man cannot be a good man in so far as he must have
a low caste man to distinguish him as high caste man. It cannot be good
to a low caste man to be conscious that there is a high caste man above
him. I have argued in my speech that a society based on Varna or Caste
is a society which is based on a wrong relationship. I had hoped that the
Mahatma would attempt to demolish my argument. But instead of doing
that he has merely reiterated his belief in Chaturvarnya without disclosing
the ground on which it is based 
Does the Mahatma practise what he preaches ? One does not like to make
personal reference in an argument which is general in its application. But
when one preaches a doctrine and holds it as a dogma there is a curiosity
to know how far he practises what he preaches. It may be that his failure
to practise is due to the ideal being too high to be attainable ; it may be
that his failure to practise is due to the innate hypocracy of the man. In
any case he exposes his conduct to examination and I must not be blamed
if I asked how far has the Mahatma attempted to realize his ideal in his
own case. The Mahatma is a Bania by birth. His ancestors had abandoned
trading in favour of ministership which is a calling of the Brahmins. In
his own life, before he became a Mahatma, when occasion came for him to
choose his career he preferred law to scales. On abandoning law he became
half saint and half politician. He has never touched trading which is his
ancestral calling. His youngest son—I take one who is a faithful follower
of his father—born a Vaishya has married a Brahmin’s daughter and has
chosen to serve a newspaper magnate. The Mahatma is not known to have
condemned him for not following his ancestral calling. It may be wrong
and uncharitable to judge an ideal by its worst specimens. But surely
the Mahatma as a specimen has no better and if he even fails to realize
the ideal then the ideal must be an impossible ideal quite opposed to the
practical instincts of man. Students of Carlyle know that he often spoke
on a subject before he thought about it. I wonder whether such has not
been the case with the Mahatma in regard to the subject matter of Caste.
Otherwise certain questions which occur to me would not have escaped him.
When can a calling be deemed to have become an ancestral calling so as
to make it binding on a man ? Must man follow his ancestral calling even
if it does not suit his capacities, even when it has ceased to be profitable ?
Must a man live by his ancestral calling even if he finds it to be immoral ?
If every one must pursue his ancestral calling then it must follow that a
man must continue to be a pimp because his grandfather was a pimp and
a woman must continue to be a prostitute because her grandmother was a
prostitute. Is the Mahatma prepared to accept the logical conclusion of his
doctrine ? To me his ideal of following one’s ancestral calling is not only an
impossible and impractical ideal, but it is also morally an indefensible ideal.
The Mahatma sees great virtue in a Brahmin remaining a Brahmin all his
life. Leaving aside the fact there are many Brahmins who do not like to remain
Brahmins all their lives. What can we say about those Brahmins who have
clung to their ancestral calling of priesthood ? Do they do so from any faith in
the virtue of the principle of ancestral calling or do they do so from motives
of filthy lucre ? The Mahatma does not seem to concern himself with such
queries. He is satisfied that these are “real Brahmins who are living on alms freely given to them and giving freely what they have of spiritual treasures”.
This is how a hereditary Brahmin priest appears to the Mahatma—a carrier
of spiritual treasures. But another portrait of the hereditary Brahmin can
also be drawn. A Brahmin can be a priest to Vishnu—the God of Love. He
can be a priest to Shankar—the God of Destruction. He can be a priest at
Buddha Gaya worshipping Buddha—the greatest teacher of mankind who
taught the noblest doctrine of Love. He also can be a priest to Kali, the
Goddess, who must have a daily sacrifice of an animal to satisfy her thirst
for blood ; He will be a priest of the temple of Rama—the Kshatriya God! He
will also be a priest of the Temple of Parshuram, the God who took Avatar
to destroy the Kshatriyas ! He can be a priest to Bramha, the Creator of
the world. He can be a priest to a Pir whose God Allah will not brook the
claim of Bramha to share his spiritual dominion over the world! No one can
say that this is a picture which is not true to life. If this is a true picture
one does not know what to say of this capacity to bear loyalties to Gods
and Goddesses whose attributes are so antagonistic that no honest man
can be a devotee to all of them. The Hindus rely upon this extraordinary
phenomenon as evidence of the greatest virtue of their religion—namely
its catholicity, its spirit of toleration. As against this facile view, it can be
urged that what is toleration and catholicity may be really nothing more
creditable than indifference or flaccid latitudinarianism. These two attitudes
are hard to distinguish in their outer seeming. But they are so vitally unlike
in their real quality that no one who examines them closely can mistake
one for the other. That a man is ready to render homage to many Gods
and Goddesses may be cited as evidence of his tolerant spirit. But can it
not also be evidence of insincerity born of a desire to serve the times ? I am
sure that this toleration is merely insincerity. If this view is well founded,
one may ask what spiritual treasure can there be with a person who is
ready to be a priest and a devotee to any deity which it serves his purpose
to worship and to adore ? Not only must such a person be deemed to be
bankrupt of all spiritual treasures but for him to practice so elevating a
profession as that of a priest simply because it is ancestral, without faith,
without belief, merely as a mechanical process handed down from father to
son, is not a conservation of virtue; it is really the prostitution of a noble
profession which is no other than the service of religion.
Why does the Mahatma cling to the theory of every one following his or
her ancestral calling ? He gives his reasons nowhere. But there must be some
reason although he does not care to avow it. Years ago writing on “Caste versus
Class” in his Young India he argued that Caste System was better than Class
System on the ground that caste was the best possible adjustment of social
stability. If that be the reason why the Mahatma clings to the theory of every one following his or her ancestral calling, then he is clinging to a false
view of social life. Everybody wants social stability and some adjustment
must be made in the relationship between individuals and classes in order
that stability may be had. But two things, I am sure nobody wants. One
thing nobody wants is static relationship, something that is unalterable,
something that is fixed for all times. Stability is wanted but not at the cost
of change when change is imperative. Second thing nobody wants is mere
adjustment. Adjustment is wanted but not at the sacrifice of social justice.
Can it be said that the adjustment of social relationship on the basis of
caste i.e. on the basis of each to his hereditary calling avoids these two
evils ? I am convinced that it does not. Far from being the best possible
adjustment I have no doubt that it is of the worst possible kind inasmuch
as it offends against both the canons of social adjustment—namely fluidity
and equity.