SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TYPE: Political and Social Essay
I would not be surprised if some of you have grown weary listening
to this tiresome tale of the sad effects which caste has produced. There
is nothing new in it. I will therefore turn to the constructive side of the
problem. What is your ideal society if you do not want caste is a question
that is bound to be asked of you. If you ask me, my ideal would be a
society based on Liberty, Equality and Fraternity. And why not ? What
objection can there be to Fraternity ? I cannot imagine any. An ideal society
should be mobile, should be full of channels for conveying a change taking
place in one part to other parts. In an ideal society there should be many
interests consciously communicated and shared. There should be varied
and free points of contact with other modes of association. In other words
there must be social endosmosis. This is fraternity, which is only another
name for democracy. Democracy is not merely a form of Government.
It is primarily a mode of associated living, of conjoint communicated
experience. It is essentially an attitude of respect and reverence towards
fellowmen. Any objection to Liberty ? Few object to liberty in the sense of
a right to free movement, in the sense of a right to life and limb. There
is no objection to liberty in the sense of a right to property, tools and
materials as being necessary for earning a living to keep the body in
due state of health. Why not allow liberty to benefit by an effective and
competent use of a person’s powers ? The supporters of caste who would
allow liberty in the sense of a right to life, limb and property, would not
readily consent to liberty in this sense, inasmuch as it involves liberty to
choose one’s profession. But to object to this kind of liberty is to perpetuate
slavery. For slavery does not merely mean a legalized form of subjection.
It means a state of society in which some men are forced to accept from
other the purposes which control their conduct. This condition obtains even
where mere is no slavery in the legal sense. It is found where, as in the
Caste System, some persons are compelled to carry on certain prescribed
callings which are not of their choice. Any objection to equality ? This
has obviously been the most contentious part of the slogan of the French Revolution. The objections to equality may be sound and one may have
to admit that all men are not equal. But what of that ? Equality may be
a fiction but nonetheless one must accept it as the governing principle. A
man’s power is dependent upon (1) physical heredity, (2) social inheritance
or endowment in the form of parental care, education, accumulation of
scientific knowledge, everything which enables him to be more efficient
than the savage, and finally, (3) on his own efforts. In all these three
respects men are undoubtedly unequal. But the question is, shall we
treat them as unequal because they are unequal ? This is a question
which the opponents of equality must answer. From the standpoint of the
individualist it may be just to treat men unequally so far as their efforts
are unequal. It may be desirable to give as much incentive as possible to
the full development of every one’s powers. But what would happen if men
were treated unequally as they are, in the first two respects ? It is obvious
that those individuals also in whose favour there is birth, education, family
name, business connections and inherited wealth would be selected in the
race. But selection under such circumstances would not be a selection of
the able. It would be the selection of the privileged. The reason therefore,
which forces that in the third respect we should treat men unequally
demands that in the first two respects we should treat men as equally as
possible. On the other hand it can be urged that if it is good for the social
body to get the most out of its members, it can get most out of them only
by making them equal as far as possible at the very start of the race.
That is one reason why we cannot escape equality. But there is another
reason why we must accept equality. A Statesman is concerned with vast
numbers of people. He has neither the time nor the knowledge to draw fine
distinctions and to treat each equitably i.e. according to need or according
to capacity. However desirable or reasonable an equitable treatment of
men may be, humanity is not capable of assortment and classification.
The statesman, therefore, must follow some rough and ready rule and that
rough and ready rule is to treat all men alike not because they are alike
but because classification and assortment is impossible. The doctrine of
equality is glaringly fallacious but taking all in all it is the only way a
statesman can proceed in politics which is a severely practical affair and
which demands a severely practical test.
But there is a set of reformers who hold out a different ideal. They go by
the name of the Arya Samajists and their ideal of social organization is what
is called Chaturvarnya or the division of society into four classes instead of
the four thousand castes that we have in India. To make it more attractive
and to disarm opposition the protagonists of Chaturvarnya take great care to
point out that their Chaturvarnya is based not on birth but on guna (worth).
At the outset, I must confess that notwithstanding the worth-basis of this Chaturvarnya, it is an ideal to which I cannot reconcile myself. In the
first place, if under the Chaturvarnya of the Arya Samajists an individual
is to take his place in the Hindu Society according to his worth. I do not
understand why the Arya Samajists insist upon labelling men as Brahmin,
Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra. A learned man would be honoured without
his being labelled a Brahmin. A soldier would be respected without his
being designated a Kshatriya. If European society honours its soldiers and
its servants without giving them permanent labels, why should Hindu
Society find it difficult to do so is a question, which Arya Samajists have
not cared to consider. There is another objection to the continuance of these
labels. All reform consists in a change in the notions, sentiment and mental
attitudes of the people towards men and things. It is common experience
that certain names become associated with certain notions and sentiments,
which determine a person’s attitude towards men and things. The names,
Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra, are names which are associated
with a definite and fixed notion in the mind of every Hindu. That notion is
that of a hierarchy based on birth. So long as these names continue, Hindus
will continue to think of the Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra as
hierarchical divisions of high and low, based on birth, and act accordingly.
The Hindu must be made to unlearn all this. But how can this happen if
the old labels remain and continue to recall to his mind old notions. If new
notions are to be inculcated in the minds of people it is necessary to give
them new names. To continue the old name is to make the reform futile. To
allow this Chaturvarnya, based on worth to be designated by such stinking
labels of Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra, indicative of social divisions
based on birth, is a snare.
To me this Chaturvarnya with its old labels is utterly repellent and my whole
being rebels against it. But I do not wish to rest my objection to Chaturvarnya
on mere grounds of sentiments. There are more solid grounds on which I rely
for my opposition to it. A close examination of this ideal has convinced me
that as a system of social organization, Chaturvarnya is impracticable, harmful
and has turned out to be a miserable failure. From a practical point of view,
the system of Chaturvarnya raises several difficulties which its protagonists
do not seem to have taken into account. The principle underlying caste is
fundamentally different from the principle underlying Varna. Not only are
they fundamentally different but they are also fundamentally opposed. The
former is based on worth. How are you going to compel people who have
acquired a higher status based on birth without reference to their worth
to vacate that status ? How are you going to compel people to recognize
the status due to a man in accordance with his worth, who is occupying a
lower status based on his birth ? For this you must first break up the Caste
System, in order to be able to establish the Varna system. How are you going to reduce the four thousand castes, based on birth, to the four Varnas,
based on worth ? This is the first difficulty which the protagonists of the
Chaturvarnya must grapple with. There is a second difficulty which the
protagonists of Chaturvarnya must grapple with, if they wish to make the
establishment of Chaturvarnya a success.
Chaturvarnya pre-supposes that you can classify people into four definite
classes. Is this possible ? In this respect, the ideal of Chaturvarnya has,
as you will see, a close affinity to the Platonic ideal. To Plato, men fell by
nature into three classes. In some individuals, he believed mere appetites
dominated. He assigned them to the labouring and trading classes. Others
revealed to him that over and above appetites, they have a courageous
disposition. He classed them as defenders in war and guardians of internal
peace. Others showed a capacity to grasp the universal reason underlying
things. He made them the law-givers of the people. The criticism to which
Plato’s Republic is subject, is also the criticism which must apply to the
system of Chaturvarnya, in so far as it proceeds upon the possibility
of an accurate classification of men into four distinct classes. The chief
criticism against Plato is that his idea of lumping of individuals into a
few sharply marked-off classes is a very superficial view of man and his
powers. Plato had no perception of the uniqueness of every individual, of
his incommensurability with others, of each individual forming a class of
his own. He had no recognition of the infinite diversity of active tendencies
and combination of tendencies of which an individual is capable. To him,
there were types of faculties or powers in the individual constitution. All this
is demonstrably wrong. Modern science has shown that lumping together
of individuals into a few sharply marked-off classes is a superficial view
of man not worthy of serious consideration. Consequently, the utilization
of the qualities of individuals is incompitable with their startification by
classes, since the qualities of individuals are so variable. Chaturvarnya
must fail for the very reason for which Plato’s Republic must fail, namely
that it is not possible to pigeon men into holes, according as he belongs to
one class or the other. That it is impossible to accurately classify people
into four definite classes is proved by the fact that the original four classes
have now become four thousand castes.
There is a third difficulty in the way of the establishment of the system of
Chaturvarnya. How are you going to maintain the system of Chaturvarnya,
supposing it was established ? One important requirement for the successful
working of Chaturvarnya is the maintenance of the penal system which could
maintain it by its sanction. The system of Chaturvarnya must perpetually
face the problem of the transgressor. Unless there is a penalty attached to the
act of transgression, men will not keep to their respective classes. The whole
system will break down, being contrary to human nature. Chaturvarnya
cannot subsist by its own inherent goodness. It must be enforced by law.
That, without penal sanction the ideal of Chaturvarnya cannot be realized,
is proved by the story in the Ramayana of Rama killing Shambuka. Some
people seem to blame Rama because he want only and without reason killed
Shambuka. But to blame Rama for killing Shambuka is to misunderstand
the whole situation. Ram Raj was a Raj based on Chaturvarnya. As a king,
Rama was bound to maintain Chaturvarnya. It was his duty therefore to kill
Shambuka, the Shudra, who had transgressed his class and wanted to be a
Brahmin. This is the reason why Rama killed Shambuka. But this also shows
that penal sanction is necessary for the maintenance of Chaturvarnya. Not
only penal sanction is necessary, but penalty of death is necessary. That is
why Rama did not inflict on Shambuka a lesser punishment. That is why
Manu-Smriti prescribes such heavy sentences as cutting off the tongue or
pouring of molten lead in the ears of the Shudra, who recites or hears the
Veda. The supporters of Chaturvarnya must give an assurance that they
could successfully classify men and they could induce modern society in the
twentieth century to reforge the penal sanctions of Manu-Smriti.
The protagonists of Chaturvarnya do not seem to have considered what
is to happen to women in their system. Are they also to be divided into
four classes, Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra? Or are they to be
allowed to take the status of their husbands. If the status of the woman is
to be the consequence of marriage what becomes of the underlying principle
of Chaturvarnya, namely, that the status of a person should be based upon
the worth of that person ? If they are to be classified according to their
worth is their classification to be nominal or real ? If it is to be nominal
then it is useless and then the protagonists of Chaturvarnya must admit
that their system does not apply to women. If it is real, are the protagonists
of Chaturvarnya prepared to follow the logical consequences of applying
it to women ? They must be prepared to have women priests and women
soldiers. Hindu society has grown accustomed to women teachers and women
barristers. It may grow accustomed to women brewers and women butchers.
But he would be a bold person, who would say that it will allow women
priests and women soldiers. But that will be the logical outcome of applying
Chaturvarnya to women. Given these difficulties, I think no one except a
congenital idiot could hope and believe in a successful regeneration of the
Chaturvarnya.
Assuming that Chaturvarnya is practicable, I contend that it is the most
vicious system. That the Brahmins should cultivate knowledge, that the
Kshatriya should bear arms, that the Vaishya should trade and that the
Shudra should serve sounds as though it was a system of division of labour.
Whether the theory was intended to state that the Shudra need not or that
whether it was intended to lay down that he must not, is an interesting
question. The defenders of Chaturvarnya give it the first meaning. They say, why should the Shudra need trouble to acquire wealth, when the three
Varnas are there to support him ? Why need the Shudra bother to take to
education, when there is the Brahmin to whom he can go when the occasion
for reading or writing arises ? Why need the Shudra worry to arm himself
because there is the Kshatriya to protect him ? The theory of Chaturvarnya,
understood in this sense, may be said to look upon the Shudra as the ward
and the three Varnas as his guardians. Thus interpreted, it is a simple,
elevating and alluring theory. Assuming this to be the correct view of the
underlying conception of Chaturvarnya, it seems to me that the system
is neither fool-proof nor knave-proof. What is to happen, if the Brahmins,
Vaishyas and Kshatriyas fail to pursue knowledge, to engage in economic
enterprise and to be efficient soldiers which are their respective functions ?
Contrary-wise, suppose that they discharge their functions but flout their
duty to the Shudra or to one another, what is to happen to the Shudra if
the three classes refuse to support him on fair terms or combine to keep him
down ? Who is to safeguard the interests of the Shudra or for the matter of
that of the Vaishya and Kshatriya when the person, who is trying to take
advantage of his ignorance is the Brahmin ? Who is to defend the liberty
of the Shudra and for the matter of that, of the Brahmin and the Vaishya
when the person who is robbing him of it is the Kshatriya ? Inter-dependence
of one class on another class is inevitable. Even dependence of one class
upon another may sometimes become allowable. But why make one person
depend upon another in the matter of his vital needs ? Education everyone
must have. Means of defence everyone must have. These are the paramount
requirements of every man for his self-preservation. How can the fact that
his neighbour is educated and armed help a man who is uneducated and
disarmed. The whole theory is absurd. These are the questions, which the
defenders of Chaturvarnya do not seem to be troubled about. But they are
very pertinent questions. Assuming their conception of Chaturvarnya that
the relationship between the different classes is that of ward and guardian
is the real conception underlying Chaturvarnya, it must be admitted that it
makes no provision to safeguard the interests of the ward from the misdeeds
of the guardian. Whether the relationship of guardian and ward was the
real underlying conception, on which Chaturvarnya was based, there is no
doubt that in practice the relation was that of master and servants. The
three classes, Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas although not very happy
in their mutual relationship managed to work by compromise. The Brahmin
flattered the Kshatriya and both let the Vaishya live in order to be able to
live upon him. But the three agreed to beat down the Shudra. He was not
allowed to acquire wealth lest he should be independent of the three Varnas.
He was prohibited from acquiring knowledge lest he should keep a steady
vigil regarding his interests. He was prohibited from bearing arms lest he
should have the means to rebel against their authority. That this is how
the Shudras were treated by the Tryavarnikas is evidenced by the Laws of Manu. There is no code of laws more in famous regarding social rights
than the Laws of Manu. Any instance from anywhere of social injustice
must pale before it. Why have the mass of people tolerated the social evils
to which they have been subjected ? There have been social revolutions in
other countries of the world. Why have there not been social revolutions
in India, is a question which has incessantly troubled me. There is only
one answer, which I can give and it is that the lower classes of Hindus
have been completely disabled for direct action on account of this wretched
system of Chaturvarnya. They could not bear arms and without arms
they could not rebel. They were all ploughmen or rather condemned to be
ploughmen and they never were allowed to convert their ploughshare into
swords. They had no bayonets and therefore everyone who chose could and
did sit upon them. On account of the Chaturvarnya, they could receive no
education. They could not think out or know the way to their salvation.
They were condemned to be lowly and not knowing the way of escape
and not having the means of escape, they became reconciled to eternal
servitude, which they accepted as their inescapable fate. It is true that
even in Europe the strong has not shrunk from the exploitation, nay the
spoliation of the weak. But in Europe, the strong have never contrived to
make the weak helpless against exploitation so shamelessly as was the
case in India among the Hindus. Social war has been raging between the
strong and the weak far more violently in Europe than it has ever been in
India. Yet, the weak in Europe has had in his freedom of military service
his physical weapon, in suffering his political weapon and in education his
moral weapon. These three weapons for emancipation were never withheld
by the strong from the weak in Europe. All these weapons were, however,
denied to the masses in India by Chaturvarnya. There cannot be a more
degrading system of social organization than the Chaturvarnya. It is the
system which deadens, paralyses and cripples the people from helpful
activity. This is no exaggeration. History bears ample evidence. There is
only one period in Indian history which is a period of freedom, greatness
and glory. That is the period of the Mourya Empire. At all other times the
country suffered from defeat and darkness. But the Mourya period was a
period when Chaturvarnya was completely annihilated, when the Shudras,
who constituted the mass of the people, came into their own and became
the rulers of the country. The period of defeat and darkness is the period
when Chaturvarnya flourished to the damnation of the greater part of the
people of the country.