On December 12, 1935, I received the following letter from
Mr. Sant Ram, the Secretary of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal :
My dear Doctor Saheb,
Many thanks for your kind letter of the 5th December. I have released
it for press without your permission for which I beg your pardon, as I
saw no harm in giving it publicity. You are a great thinker, and it is my
well-considered opinion that none else has studied the problem of Caste so
deeply as you have. I have always benefited myself and our Mandal from
your ideas. I have explained and preached it in the Kranti many times and
I have even lectured on it in many Conferences. I am now very anxious to
read the exposition of your new formula—“It is not possible to break Caste
without annihilating the religious notions on which it, the Caste system,
is founded.” Please do explain it at length at your earliest convenience, so
that we may take up the idea and emphasise it from press and platform.
At present, it is not fully clear to me.
Our Executive Committee persists in having you as our President for
our Annual Conference. We can change our dates to accommodate your
convenience. Independent Harijans of Punjab are very much desirous to meet
you and discuss with you their plans. So if you kindly accept our request and
come to Lahore to preside over the Conference it will serve double purpose.
We will invite Harijan leaders of all shades of opinion and you will get an
opportunity of giving your ideas to them.
The Mandal has deputed our Assistant Secretary, Mr. Indra Singh, to
meet you at Bombay in Xmas and discuss with you the whole situation with
a view to persuade you to please accept our request.
The Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal, I was given to understand, to be an
organization of Caste Hindu Social Reformers, with the one and
only aim, namely to eradicate the Caste System from amongst the
Hindus. As a rule, I do not like to take any part in a movement
which is carried on by the Caste Hindus. Their attitude towards
social reform is so different from mine that I have found it
difficult to pull on with them. Indeed, I find their company quite uncongenial to me on account of our differences of opinion. Therefore
when the Mandal first approached me I declined their invitation to
preside. The Mandal, however, would not take a refusal from me and
sent down one of its members to Bombay to press me to accept the
invitation. In the end I agreed to preside. The Annual Conference
was to be held at Lahore, the headquarters of the Mandal. The
Conference was to meet in Easter but was subsequently postponed
to the middle of May 1936. The Reception Committee of the Mandal
has now cancelled the Conference. The notice of cancellation came
long after my Presidential address had been printed. The copies of
this address are now lying with me. As I did not get an opportunity
to deliver the address from the presidential chair the public has not
had an opportunity to know my views on the problems created by
the Caste System. To let the public know them and also to dispose of
the printed copies which are lying on my hand, I have decided to put
the printed copies of the address in the market. The accompanying
pages contain the text of that address.
The public will be curious to know what led to the cancellation
of my appointment as the President of the Conference. At the start,
a dispute arose over the printing of the address. I desired that the
address should be printed in Bombay. The Mandal wished that it
should be printed in Lahore on the ground of economy. I did not agree
and insisted upon having it printed in Bombay. Instead of agreeing
to my proposition I received a letter signed by several members of
the Mandal from which I give the following extract :
27-3-36
Revered Dr. Ji,
Your letter of the 24th instant addressed to Sjt. Sant Ram has been
shown to us. We were a little disappointed to read it. Perhaps you are not
fully aware of the situation that has arisen here. Almost all the Hindus in
the Punjab are against your being invited to this province. The Jat-PatTodak Mandal has been subjected to the bitterest criticism and has received
censorious rebuke from all quarters. All the Hindu leaders among whom
being Bhai Parmanand, ML.A. (Ex-President, Hindu Maha Sabha), Mahatma
Hans Raj, Dr. Gokal Chand Narang, Minister for Local Self-Government,
Raja Narendra Nath, M.L.C. etc., have dissociated themselves from this
step of the Mandal.
Despite all this the runners of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal (the leading figure
being Sjt. Sant Ram) are determined to wade through thick and thin but would not give up the idea of your presidentship. The Mandal has earned a bad name.
Under the circumstances it becomes your duty to co-operate with the Mandal.
On the one hand, they are being put to so much trouble and hardship by the
Hindus and if on the other hand you too augment their difficulties it will be a
most sad coincidence of bad luck for them.
We hope you will think over the matter and do what is good for us all.
This letter puzzled me greatly. I could not understand why the Mandal
should displease me for the sake of a few rupees in the matter of printing
the address. Secondly, I could not believe that men like Sir Gokal Chand
Narang had really resigned as a protest against my selection as President
because I had received the following letter from Sir Gokal Chand himself :
5 Montgomery Road
Lahore, 7-2-36
Dear Doctor Ambedkar,
I am glad to learn from the workers of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal that you
have agreed to preside at their next anniversary to be held at Lahore during
the Easter holidays. It will give me much pleasure if you stay with me while
you are at Lahore. More when we meet.
Yours sincerely,
G. C. NARANG
Whatever be the truth I did not yield to this pressure. But even when
the Mandal found that I was insisting upon having my address printed
in Bombay instead of agreeing to my proposal the Mandal sent me a
wire that they were sending Mr. Har Bhagwan to Bombay to “talk over
matters personally” Mr. Har Bhagwan came to Bombay on the 9th of
April. When I met Mr. Har Bhagwan I found that he had nothing to say
regarding the issue. Indeed, he was so unconcerned regarding the printing
of the address, whether it should be printed in Bombay or in Lahore,
that he did not even mention it in the course of our conversation. All
that he was anxious for was to know the contents of the address. I was
then convinced that in getting the address printed in Lahore the main
object of the Mandal was not to save money but to get at the contents
of the address. I gave him a copy. He did not feel very happy with some
parts of it. He returned to Lahore. From Lahore, he wrote to me the
following letter :
Lahore, dated April 14, 1936
My dear Doctor Sahib,
Since my arrival from Bombay, on the 12th, I have been indisposed owing
to my having not slept continuously for 5 or 6 nights, which were spent in the train. Reaching here I came to know that you had come to Amritsar. I
would have seen you there if I were well enough to go about. I have made
over your address to Mr. Sant Ram for translation and he has liked it very
much, but he is not sure whether it could be translated by him for printing
before the 25th. In any case, it woud have a wide publicity and we are sure
it would wake the Hindus up from their slumber.
The passage I pointed out to you at Bombay has been read by some of
our friends with a little misgiving, and those of us who would like to see
the Conference terminate without any untoward incident would prefer that
at least the word “Veda” be left out for the time being. I leave this to your
good sense. I hope, however, in your concluding paragraphs you will make
it clear that the views expressed in the address are your own and that the
responsibility does not lie on the Mandal. I hope, you will not mind this
statement of mine and would let us have 1,000 copies of the address, for
which we shall, of course, pay. To this effect I have sent you a telegram
today. A cheque of Rs. 100 is enclosed herewith which kindly acknowledge,
and send us your bills in due time.
I have called a meeting of the Reception Committee and shall communicate
their decision to you immediately. In the meantime kindly accept my heartfelt
thanks for the kindness shown to me and the great pains taken by you in
the preparation of your address. You have really put us under a heavy debt
of gratitude.
Yours sincerely,
HAR BHAGWAN
P.S.—Kindly send the copies of the address by passenger train as soon
as it is printed, so that copies may be sent to the Press for publication.