SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
SECTION: Speech (Prepared but Not Delivered)
Let me now turn to the Socialists. Can the Socialists ignore the problem
arising out of the social order ? The Socialists of India following their fellows
in Europe are seeking to apply the economic interpretation of history to
the facts of India. They propound that man is an economic creature, that
his activities and aspirations are bound by economic facts, that property is
the only source of power. They, therefore, preach that political and social
reforms are but gigantic illusions and that economic reform by equalization
of property must have precedence over every other kind of reform. One may
join issue on every one of these premises on which rests the Socialists’ case
for economic reform having priority over every other kind of reform. One
may contend that economic motive is not the only motive by which man
is actuated. That economic power is the only kind of power no student of
human society can accept. That the social status of an individual by itself
often becomes a source of power and authority is made clear by the sway
which the Mahatmas have held over the common man. Why do millionaires
in India obey penniless Sadhus and Fakirs ? Why do millions of paupers in
India sell their trifling trinckets which constitute their only wealth and go
to Benares and Mecca ? That, religion is the source of power is illustrated
by the history of India where the priest holds a sway over the common man
often greater than the magistrate and where everything, even such things
as strikes and elections, so easily take a religious turn and can so easily be
given a religious twist. Take the case of the Plebians of Rome as a further
illustration of the power of religion over man. It throws great light on this
point. The Plebs had fought for a share in the supreme executive under
the Roman Republic and had secured the appointment of a Plebian Consul
elected by a separate electorate constituted by the Commitia Centuriata,
which was an assembly of Plebians. They wanted a Consul of their own because they felt that the Patrician Consuls used to discriminate against the
Plebians in carrying on the administration. They had apparently obtained a
great gain because under the Republican Constitution of Rome one Consul
had the power of vetoing an act of the other Consul. But did they in fact
gain anything ? The answer to this question must be in the negative. The
Plebians never could get a Plebian Consul who could be said to be a strong
man and who could act independently of the Patrician Consul. In the ordinary
course of things the Plebians should have got a strong Plebian Consul in view
of the fact that his election was to be by a separate electorate of Plebians.
The question is why did they fail in getting a strong Plebian to officiate
as their Consul ? The answer to this question reveals the dominion which
religion exercises over the minds of men. It was an accepted creed of the
whole Roman populus that no official could enter upon the duties of his office
unless the Oracle of Delphi declared that he was acceptable to the Goddess.
The priests who were in charge of the temple of the Goddess of Delphi were
all Patricians. Whenever therefore the Plebians elected a Consul who was
known to be a strong party man opposed to the Patricians or “communal” to
use the term that is current in India, the Oracle invariably declared that he
was not acceptable to the Goddess. This is how the Plebians were cheated
out of their rights. But what is worthy of note is that the Plebians permitted
themselves to be thus cheated because they too like the Patricians, held firmly
the belief that the approval of the Goddess was a condition precedent to the
taking charge by an official of his duties and that election by the people
was not enough. If the Plebians had contended that election was enough
and that the approval by the Goddess was not necessary they would have
derived the fullest benefit from the political right which they had obtained.
But they did not. They agreed to elect another, less suitable to themselves
but more suitable to the Goddess which in fact meant more amenable to
the Patricians. Rather than give up religion, the Plebians give up material
gain for which they had fought so hard. Does this not show that religion can
be a source of power as great as money if not greater ? The fallacy of the
Socialists lies in supposing that because in the present stage of European
Society property as a source of power is predominant, that the same is true
of India or that the same was true of Europe in the past. Religion, social
status and property are all sources of power and authority, which one man
has, to control the liberty of another. One is predominant at one stage, the
other is predominant at another stage. That is the only difference. If liberty
is the ideal, if liberty means the destruction of the dominion which one man
holds over another then obviously it cannot be insisted upon that economic
reform must be the one kind of reform worthy of pursuit. If the source of
power and dominion is at any given time or in any given society social and
religious then social reform and religious reform must be accepted as the
necessary sort of reform.
One can thus attack the doctrine of Economic Interpretation of History
adopted by the Socialists of India. But I recognize that economic interpretation
of history is not necessary for the validity of the Socialist contention that
equalization of property is the only real reform and that it must precede
everything else. However, what I like to ask the Socialists is this : Can you
have economic reform without first bringing about a reform of the social
order ? The Socialists of India do not seem to have considered this question.
I do not wish to do them an injustice. I give below a quotation from a letter
which a prominent Socialist wrote a few days ago to a friend of mine in
which he said, “I do not believe that we can build up a free society in India
so long as there is a trace of this ill-treatment and suppression of one class
by another. Believing as I do in a socialist ideal, inevitably I believe in
perfect equality in the treatment of various classes and groups. I think that
Socialism offers the only true remedy for this as well as other problems.”
Now the question that I like to ask is : Is it enough for a Socialist to say, “I
believe in perfect equality in the treatment of the various classes ?” To say
that such a belief is enough is to disclose a complete lack of understanding
of what is involved in Socialism. If Socialism is a practical programme and
is not merely an ideal, distant and far off, the question for a Socialist is not
whether he believes in equality. The question for him is whether he minds
one class ill-treating and suppressing another class as a matter of system, as
a matter of principle and thus allow tyranny and oppression to continue to
divide one class from another. Let me analyse the factors that are involved
in the realization of Socialism in order to explain fully my point. Now it is
obvious that the economic reform contemplated by the Socialists cannot come
about unless there is a revolution resulting in the seizure of power. That
seizure of power must be by a proletariat. The first question I ask is : Will
the proletariat of India combine to bring about this revolution ? What will
move men to such an action ? It seems to me that other things being equal
the only thing that will move one man to take such an action is the feeling
that other man with whom he is acting are actuated by feeling of equality
and fraternity and above all of justice. Men will not join in a revolution for
the equalization of property unless they know that after the revolution is
achieved they will be treated equally and that there will be no discrimination
of caste and creed. The assurance of a socialist leading the revolution that
he does not believe in caste, I am sure, will not suffice. The assurance
must be the assurance proceeding from much deeper foundation, namely,
the mental attitude of the compatriots towards one another in their spirit
of personal equality and fraternity. Can it be said that the proletariat of
India, poor as it is, recognise no distinctions except that of the rich and the
poor ? Can it be said that the poor in India recognize no such distinctions of
caste or creed, high or low ? If the fact is that they do, what unity of front
can be expected from such a proletariat in its action against the rich ? How can there be a revolution if the proletariat cannot present a united front?
Suppose for the sake of argument that by some freak of fortune a revolution
does take place and the Socialists come in power, will they not have to deal
with the problems created by the particular social order prevalent in India ?
I can’t see how a Socialist State in India can function for a second without
having to grapple with the problems created by the prejudices which make
Indian people observe the distinctions of high and low, clean and unclean.
If Socialists are not to be content with the mouthing of fine phrases, if the
Socialists wish to make Socialism a definite reality then they must recognize
that the problem of social reform is fundamental and that for them there
is no escape from it. That, the social order prevalent in India is a matter
which a Socialist must deal with, that unless he does so he cannot achieve
his revolution and that if he does achieve it as a result of good fortune he
will have to grapple with it if he wishes to realize his ideal, is a proposition
which in my opinion is incontrovertible. He will be compelled to take account
of caste after revolution if he does not take account of it before revolution.
This is only another way of saying that, turn in any direction you like, caste
is the monster that crosses your path. You cannot have political reform, you
cannot have economic reform, unless you kill this monster.
It is a pity that Caste even today has its defenders. The defences are
many. It is defended on the ground that the Caste System is but another
name for division of labour and if division of labour is a necessary feature
of every civilized society then it is argued that there is nothing wrong in
the Caste System. Now the first thing is to be urged against this view is
that Caste System is not merely division of labour. It is also a division
of labourers. Civilized society undoubtedly needs division of labour. But
in no civilized society is division of labour accompanied by this unnatural
division of labourers into water-tight compartments. Caste System is
not merely a division of labourers which is quite different from division
of labour—it is an heirarchy in which the divisions of labourers are
graded one above the other. In no other country is the division of labour
accompanied by this gradation of labourers. There is also a third point of
criticism against this view of the Caste System. This division of labour is
not spontaneous, it is not based on natural aptitudes. Social and individual
efficiency requires us to develop the capacity of an individual to the point
of competency to choose and to make his own career. This principle is
violated in the Caste System in so far as it involves an attempt to appoint
tasks to individuals in advance, selected not on the basis of trained original
capacities, but on that of the social status of the parents. Looked at from
another point of view this stratification of occupations which is the result
of the Caste System is positively pernicious. Industry is never static. It
undergoes rapid and abrupt changes. With such changes an individual must
be free to change his occupation. Without such freedom to adjust himself to
changing circumstances it would be impossible for him to gain his livelihood.
Now the Caste System will not allow Hindus to take to occupations where
they are wanted if they do not belong to them by heredity. If a Hindu is
seen to starve rather than take to new occupations not assigned to his
Caste, the reason is to be found in the Caste System. By not permitting
readjustment of occupations, caste becomes a direct cause of much of the
unemployment we see in the country. As a form of division of labour the
Caste system suffers from another serious defect. The division of labour
brought about by the Caste System is not a division based on choice.
Individual sentiment, individual preference has no place in it. It is based on
the dogma of predestination. Considerations of social efficiency would compel
us to recognize that the greatest evil in the industrial system is not so much
poverty and the suffering that it involves as the fact that so many persons
have callings which make no appeal to those who are engaged in them. Such
callings constantly provoke one to aversion, ill-will and the desire to evade.
There are many occupations in India which on account of the fact that they
are regarded as degraded by the Hindus provoke those who are engaged in
them to aversion. There is a constant desire to evade and escape from such
occupations which arises solely because of the blighting effect which they
produce upon those who follow them owing to the slight and stigma cast
upon them by the Hindu religion. What efficiency can there be in a system
under which neither men’s hearts nor their minds are in their work ? As
an economic organization Caste is therefore a harmful institution, inasmuch
as, it involves the subordination of man’s natural powers and inclinations
to the exigencies of social rules.