SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
CONTEXT: Ambedkar responds to Mahatma Gandhi’s critique of his original speech “Annihilation of Caste” published in Harijan and letters. 
Some might think that the Mahatma has made much progress inasmuch
as he now only believes in Varna and does not believe in Caste. It is
true that there was a time when the Mahatma was a full-blooded and a
blue-blooded Sanatani Hindu. He believed in the Vedas, the Upanishads,
the Puranas and all that goes by the name of Hindu scriptures and
therefore in avatars and rebirth. He believed in Caste and defended it
with the vigour of the orthodox. He condemned the cry for inter-dining,
inter-drinking and inter-marrying and argued that restraints about interdining to a great extent “helped the cultivation of will-power and the
conservation of certain social virtue”. It is good that he has repudiated
this sanctimonious nonsense and admitted that caste “is harmful both to
spiritual and national growth,” and may be, his son’s marriage outside
his caste has had something to do with this change of view. But has the
Mahatma really progressed ? What is the nature of the Varna for which
the Mahatma stands ? Is it the Vedic conception as commonly understood
and preached by Swami Dayanand Saraswati and his followers, the Arya
Samajists ? The essence of the Vedic conception of Varna is the pursuit of
a calling which is appropriate to one’s natural aptitude. The essence of the
Mahatma’s conception of Varna is the pursuit of ancestral calling irrespective
of natural aptitude. What is the difference between Caste and Varna as
understood by the Mahatma ? I find none. As defined by the Mahatma,
Varna becomes merely a different name for Caste for the simple reason
that it is the same in essence—namely pursuit of ancestral calling. Far
from making progress the Mahatma has suffered retrogression. By putting
this interpretation upon the Vedic conception of Varna he has really made
ridiculous what was sublime. While I reject the Vedic Varnavyavastha for
reasons given in the speech I must admit that the Vedic theory of Varna
as interpreted by Swami Dayanand and some others is a sensible and an
inoffensive thing. It did not admit birth as a determining factor in fixing the place of an individual in society. It only recognized worth. The Mahatma’s
view of Varna not only makes nonsense of the Vedic Varna but it makes
it an abominable thing. Varna and Caste are two very different concepts.
Varna is based on the principle of each according to his worth-while Caste
is based on the principle of each according to his birth. The two are as
distinct as chalk is from cheese. In fact there is an antithesis between
the two. If the Mahatma believes as he does in every one following his
or her ancestral calling, then most certainly he is advocating the Caste
System and that in calling it the Varna System he is not only guilty of
terminological inexactitude, but he is causing confusion worse confounded.
I am sure that all his confusion is due to the fact that the Mahatma has
no definite and clear conception as to what is Varna and what is Caste
and as to the necessity of either for the conservation of Hinduism. He has
said and one hopes that he will not find some mystic reason to change his
view that caste is not the essence of Hinduism. Does he regard Varna as
the essence of Hinduism ? One cannot as yet give any categorical answer.
Readers of his article on “Dr. Ambedkar’s Indictment” will answer “No”. In
that article he does not say that the dogma of Varna is an essential part
of the creed of Hinduism. Far from making Varna the essence of Hinduism
he says “the essence of Hinduism is contained in its enunciation of one
and only God as Truth and its bold acceptance of Ahimsa as the law of
the human family” But the readers of his article in reply to Mr. Sant Ram
will say “Yes”. In that article he says “How can a Muslim remain one if
he rejects the Quran, or a Christian remain as Christian if he rejects
the Bible ? If Caste and Varna are convertible terms and if Varna is an
integral part of the Shastras which define Hinduism I do not know how a
person who rejects Caste, i.e. Varna can call himself a Hindu ?” Why this
prevarication ? Why does the Mahatma hedge ? Whom does he want to
please ? Has the saint failed to sense the truth ? Or does the politician stand
in the way of the Saint ? The real reason why the Mahatma is suffering
from this confusion is probably to be traced to two sources. The first is the
temperament of the Mahatma. He has almost in everything the simplicity
of the child with the child’s capacity for self-deception. Like a child he can
believe in anything he wants to believe. We must therefore wait till such
time as it pleases the Mahatma to abandon his faith in Varna as it has
pleased him to abandon his faith in Caste. The second source of confusion
is the double role which the Mahatma wants to play—of a Mahatma and a
Politician. As a Mahatma he may be trying to spiritualize Politics. Whether
he has succeeded in it or not Politics have certainly commercialized him.
A politician must knew that Society cannot bear the whole truth and that
he must not speak the whole truth; if he is speaking the whole truth it
is bad for his politics. The reason why the Mahatma is always supporting
Caste and Varna is because he is afraid that if he opposed them he will
lose his place in politics. Whatever may be the source of this confusion the Mahatma must be told that he is deceiving himself and also deceiving the
people by preaching Caste under the name of Varna.
The Mahatma says that the standards I have applied to test Hindus and
Hinduism are too severe and that judged by those standards every known
living faith will probably fail. The complaint that my standards are high
may be true. But the question is not whether they are high or whether they
are low. The question is whether they are the right standards to apply.
A People and their Religion must be judged by social standards based on
social ethics. No other standard would have any meaning if religion is held
to be a necessary good for the well-being of the people. Now I maintain
that the standards I have applied to test Hindus and Hinduism are the
most appropriate standards and that I know of none that are better. The
conclusion that every known religion would fail if tested by my standards
may be true. But this fact should not give the Mahatma as the champion
of Hindus and Hinduism a ground for comfort any more than the existence
of one madman should give comfort to another madman or the existence of
one criminal should give comfort to another criminal. I like to assure the
Mahatma that it is not the mere failure of the Hindus and Hinduism which
has produced in me the feelings of disgust and contempt with which I am
charged. I realize that the world is a very imperfect world and any one
who wants to live in it must bear with its imperfections. But while I am
prepared to bear with the imperfections and shortcomings of the society in
which I may be destined to labour, I feel I should not consent to live in a
society which cherishes wrong ideals or a society which having right ideals
will not consent to bring its social life in conformity with those ideals. If I
am disgusted with Hindus and Hinduism it is because I am convinced that
they cherish wrong ideals and live a wrong social life. My quarrel with
Hindus and Hinduism is not over the imperfections of their social conduct.
It is much more fundamental. It is over their ideals.
Hindu society seems to me to stand in need of a moral regeneration which
it is dangerous to postpone. And the question is who can determine and
control this moral regeneration ? Obviously only those who have undergone an
intellectual regeneration and those who are honest enough to have the courage
of their convictions born of intellectual emancipation. Judged by this standard
the Hindu leaders who count are in my opinion quite unfit for the task. It
is impossible to say that they have undergone the preliminary intellectual
regeneration. If they had undergone an intellectual regeneration they would
neither delude themselves in the simple way of the untaught multitude nor
would they take advantage of the primitive ignorance of others as one sees
them doing. Notwithstanding the crumbling state of Hindu society these leaders, will nevertheless unblushingly appeal to ideals of the past which
have in every way ceased to have any connection with the present; which
however suitable they might have been in the days of their origin have now
become a warning rather than a guide. They still have a mystic respect
for the earlier forms which make them disinclined—nay opposed to any
examination of the foundations of their Society. The Hindu masses are
of course incredibly heedless in the formation of their beliefs. But so are
the Hindu leaders. And what is worse is that these Hindu leaders become
filled with an illicit passion for their beliefs when any one proposes to rob
them of their companionship. The Mahatma is no exception. The Mahatma
appears not to believe in thinking. He prefers to follow the saints. Like a
conservative with his reverence for consecrated notions he is afraid that if
he once starts thinking, many ideals and institutions to which he clings wilt
be doomed. One must sympathize with him. For every act of independent
thinking puts some portion of apparently stable world in peril. But it is
equally true that dependence on saints cannot lead us to knew the truth.
The saints are after all only human beings and, as Lord Balfour said, “the
human mind is no more a truth finding apparatus than the snout of a pig”.
In so far as he does think, to me he really appears to be prostituting his
intelligence to find reasons for supporting this archaic social structure of the
Hindus. He is the most influential apologist of it and therefore the worst
enemy of the Hindus.
Unlike the Mahatma there are Hindu leaders who arc not content merely
to believe and follow. They dare to think, and act in accordance with the
result of their thinking. But unfortunately they are cither a dishonest lot
or an indifferent lot when it comes to the question of giving right guidance
to the mass of the people. Almost every Brahmin has transgressed the
rule of Caste. The number of Brahmins who sell shoes is far greater than
those who practise priesthood. Not only have the Brahmins given up their
ancestral calling of priesthood for trading but they have entered trades
which are prohibited to them by the Shastras. Yet how many Brahmins who
break Caste every day will preach against Caste and against the Shastras ?
For one honest Brahmin preaching against Caste and Shastras because his
practical instinct and moral conscience cannot support a conviction in them,
there are hundreds who break Caste and trample upon the Shastras every
day but who are the most fanatic upholders of the theory of Caste and the
sanctity of the Shastras. Why this duplicity ? Because they feel that if the
masses are emancipated from the yoke of Caste they would be a menace to
the power and prestige of the Brahmins as a class. The dishonesty of this
intellectual class who would deny the masses the fruits of their thinking is
a most disgraceful phenomenon.
The Hindus in the words of Mathew Arnold are “wandering between two
worlds, one dead, the other powerless to be born”. What are they to do ? The Mahatma to whom they appeal for guidance does not believe in thinking
and can therefore give no guidance which can be said to stand the test of
experience. The intellectual classes to whom the masses look for guidance are
either too dishonest or too indifferent to educate them in the right direction.
We are indeed witnesses to a great tragedy. In the face of this tragedy all
one can do is to lament and say—such be thy Leaders, O! Hindus. 
