SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TITLE: Annihilation of Caste
SECTION: Preface To The Second Edition
TYPE: Political and Social Essay
The speech prepared by me for the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal of Lahore has
had an astonishingly warm reception from the Hindu public for whom it
was primarily intended. The English edition of one thousand five hundred
was exhausted within two months of its publication. It is translated into
Gujarati and Tamil. It is being translated in Marathi, Hindi, Punjabi and
Malayalam. The demand for the English text still continues unabated. To
satisfy this demand it has become necessary to issue a Second Edition.
Considerations of history and effectiveness of appeal have led me to retain
the original form of the essay—namely the speech form—although I was
asked to recast it in the form of a direct narrative. To this edition I have
added two appendices. I have collected in Appendix I the two articles
written by Mr. Gandhi by way of review of my speech in the Harijan,
and his letter to Mr. Sant Ram, a member of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal.
In Appendix II, I have printed my views in reply to the articles of Mr.
Gandhi collected in Appendix I. Besides Mr. Gandhi many others have
adversely criticised my views as expressed in my speech. But I have felt
that in taking notice of such adverse comments I should limit myself to
Mr. Gandhi. This I have done not because what he has said is so weighty
as to deserve a reply but because to many a Hindu he is an oracle, so
great that when he opens his lips it is expected that the argument must
close and no dog must bark. But the world owes much to rebels who
would dare to argue in the face of the pontiff and insist that he is not
infallible. I do not care for the credit which every progressive society must give to its rebels. I shall be satisfied if I make the Hindus realize
that they are the sick men of India and that their sickness is causing
danger to the health and happiness of other Indians.