SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TYPE: Political and Social Essay
Chaturvarnya is not new. It is as old as the Vedas. That is one of the
reasons why we are asked by the Arya Samajists to consider its claims.
Judging from the past as a system of social organization, it has been tried
and it has failed. How many times have the Brahmins annihilated the seed of the Kshatriyas ! How many times have the Kshatriyas annihilated the
Brahmins! The Mahabharata and the Puranas are full of incidents of the
strife between the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas. They even quarreled
over such petty questions as to who should salute first, as to who should
give way first, the Brahmins or the Kshatriyas, when the two met in
the street. Not only was the Brahmin an eyesore to the Kshatriya and
the Kshatriya an eyesore to the Brahmin, it seems that the Kshatriyas
had become tyrannical and the masses, disarmed as they were under the
system of Chaturvarnya, were praying Almighty God for relief from their
tyranny. The Bhagwat tells us very definitely that Krishna had taken
Avtar for one sacred purpose and that was to annihilate the Kshatriyas.
With these instances of rivalry and enmity between the different Varnas
before us, I do not understand how any one can hold out Chaturvarnya
as an ideal to be aimed at or as a pattern, on which the Hindu Society
should be remodelled,
I have dealt with those, who are without you and whose hostility to your
ideal is quite open. There appear to be others, who are neither without
you not with you. I was hesitating whether I should deal with their point
of view. But on further consideration I have come to the conclusion that
I must and that for two reasons. Firstly, their attitude to the problem of
caste is not merely an attitude of neutrality, but is an attitude of armed
neutrality. Secondly, they probably represent a considerable body of people.
Of these, there is one set which finds nothing peculiar nor odious in the
Caste System of the Hindus. Such Hindus cite the case of Muslims, Sikhs
and Christians and find comfort in the fact that they too have castes
amongst them. In considering, this question you must at the outset bear
in mind that nowhere is human society one single whole. It is always
plural. In the world of action, the individual is one limit and society the
other. Between them lie all sorts of associative arrangements of lesser
and larger scope, families, friendship, co-operative associations, business
combines, political parties, bands of thieves and robbers. These small
groups are usually firmly welded together and are often as exclusive as
castes. They have a narrow and intensive code, which is often anti-social.
This is true of every society, in Europe as well as in Asia. The question
to be asked in determining whether a given society is an ideal society; is
not whether there are groups in it, because groups exist in all societies.
The questions to be asked in determining what is an ideal society are :
How numerous and varied are the interests which are consciously shared
by the groups ? How full and free is the interplay with other forms of
associations ? Are the forces that separate groups and classes more numerous
than the forces that unite ? What social significance is attached to this
group life ? Is its exclusiveness a matter of custom and convenience or is
it a matter of religion ? It is in the light of these questions that one must decide whether caste among Non-Hindus is the same as caste among Hindus.
If we apply these considerations to castes among Mohammedans, Sikhs and
Christians on the one hand and to castes among Hindus on the other, you
will find that caste among Non-Hindus is fundamentally different from caste
among Hindus. First, the ties, which consciously make the Hindus hold
together, are non-existent, while among Non-Hindus there are many that
hold them together. The strength of a society depends upon the presence of
points of contact, possibilities of interaction between different groups which
exist in it. These are what Carlyle calls “organic filaments” i.e. the elastic
threads which help to bring the disintegrating elements together and to
reunite them. There is no integrating force among the Hindus to counteract
the disintegration caused by caste. While among the Non-Hindus there
are plenty of these organic filaments which bind them together. Again it
must be borne in mind that although there are castes among Non-Hindus,
as there are among Hindus, caste has not the same social significance for
Non-Hindus as it has for Hindus. Ask Mohammedan or a Sikh, who he is ?
He tells you that he is a Mohammedan or a Sikh as the case may be. He
does not tell you his caste although he has one and you are satisfied with
his answer. When he tells you that he is a Muslim, you do not proceed to
ask him whether he is a Shiya or a Sunni; Sheikh or Saiyad; Khatik or
Pinjari. When he tells you he is a Sikh, you do not ask him whether he is
Jat or Roda; Mazbi or Ramdasi. But you are not satisfied, if a person tells
you that he is a Hindu. You feel bound to inquire into his caste. Why ?
Because so essential is caste in the case of a Hindu that without knowing
it you do not feel sure what sort of a being he is. That caste has not the
same social significance among Non-Hindus as it has among Hindus is clear
if you take into consideration the consequences which follow breach of caste.
There may be castes among Sikhs and Mohammedans but the Sikhs and the
Mohammedans will not outcast a Sikh or a Mohammedan if he broke his
caste. Indeed, the very idea of excommunication is foreign to the Sikhs and
the Mohammedans. But with the Hindus the case is entirely different. He
is sure to be outcasted if he broke caste. This shows the difference in the
social significance of caste to Hindus and Non-Hindus. This is the second
point of difference. But there is also a third and a more important one. Caste
among the non-Hindus has no religious consecration ; but among the Hindus
most decidedly it has. Among the Non-Hindus, caste is only a practice, not a
sacred institution. They, did not originate it. With them it is only a survival.
They do not regard caste as a religious dogma. Religion compels the Hindus
to treat isolation and segregation of castes as a virtue. Religion does not
compel the Non-Hindus to take the same attitude towards caste. If Hindus
wish to break caste, their religion will come in their way. But it will not be
so in the case of Non-Hindus. It is, therefore, a dangerous delusion to take
comfort in the mere existence of caste among Non-Hindus, without caring
to know what place caste occupies in their life and whether there are other “organic filaments”, which subordinate the feeling of caste to the feeling of
community. The sooner the Hindus are cured of this delusion the better.
The other set denies that caste presents any problem at all for the Hindus
to consider. Such Hindus seek comfort in the view that the Hindus have
survived and take this as a proof of their fitness to survive. This point of
view is well expressed by Prof. S. Radhakrishnan in his Hindu view of
Life. Referring to Hinduism he says, “The civilization itself has not been a
shortlived one. Its historic records date back for over four thousand years
and even then it had reached a stage of civilization which has continued
its unbroken, though at times slow and static, course until the present day.
It has stood the stress and strain of more than four or five millenniums
of spiritual thought and experience. Though peoples of different races and
cultures have been pouring into India from the dawn of History, Hinduism
has been able to maintain its supremacy and even the proselytising creeds
backed by political power have not been able to coerce the large majority
of Hindus to their views. The Hindu culture possesses some vitality which
seems to be denied to some other more forceful currents. It is no more
necessary to dissect Hinduism than to open a tree to see whether the sap
still runs.” The name of Prof. Radhakrishnan is big enough to invest with
profundity whatever he says and impress the minds of his readers. But I
must not hesitate to speak out my mind. For, I fear that, his statement
may become the basis of a vicious argument that the fact of survival is
proof of fitness to survive. It seems to me that the question is not whether
a community lives or dies ; the question is on what plane does it live. There
are different modes of survival. But all are not equally honourable. For an
individual as well as for a society, there is a gulf between merely living
and living worthily. To fight in a battle and to live in glory is one mode. To
beat a retreat, to surrender and to live the life of a captive is also a mode
of survival. It is useless for a Hindu to take comfort in the fact that he and
his people have survived. What he must consider is what is the quality of
their survival. If he does that, I am sure he will cease to take pride in the
mere fact of survival. A Hindu’s life has been a life of continuous defeat
and what appears to him to be life everlasting is not living everlastingly
but is really a life which is perishing everlastingly. It is a mode of survival
of which every right-minded Hindu, who is not afraid to own up the truth,
will feel ashamed.
There is no doubt, in my opinion, that unless you change your social
order you can achieve little by way of progress. You cannot mobilize the
community either for defence or for offence. You cannot build anything on
the foundations of caste. You cannot build up a nation, you cannot build
up a morality. Anything that you will build on the foundations of caste will
crack and will never be a whole.
The only question that remains to be considered is—How to bring about
the reform of the Hindu social order ? How to abolish caste ? This is a
question of supreme importance. There is a view that in the reform of
caste, the first step to take, is to abolish sub-castes. This view is based
upon the supposition that there is a greater similarity in manners and
status between sub-castes than there is between castes. I think, this is an
erroneous supposition. The Brahmins of Northern and Central India are
socially of lower grade, as compared with the Brahmins of the Deccan and
Southern India. The former are only cooks and water-carriers while the
latter occupy a high social position. On the other hand, in Northern India,
the Vaishyas and Kayasthas are intellectually and socially on a par with the
Brahmins of the Deccan and Southern India. Again, in the matter of food
there is no similarity between the Brahmins of the Deccan and Southern
India, who are vegetarians and the Brahmins of Kashmir and Bengal who
are non-vegetarians. On the other hand, the Brahmins of the Deccan and
Southern India have more in common so far as food is concerned with such
non-Brahmins as the Gujaratis, Marwaris, Banias and Jains. There is no
doubt that from the standpoint of making the transit from one caste to
another easy, the fusion of the Kayasthas of Northern India and the other
Non-Brahmins of Southern India with the Non-Brahmins of the Deccan and
the Dravid country is more practicable than the fusion of the Brahmins of
the South with the Brahmins of the North. But assuming that the fusion
of sub-Castes is possible, what guarantee is there that the abolition of subCastes will necessarily lead to the abolition of Castes ? On the contrary,
it may happen that the process may stop with the abolition of sub-Castes.
In that case, the abolition of sub-Castes will only help to strengthen the
Castes and make them more powerful and therefore more mischievous.
This remedy is therefore neither practicable nor effective and may easily
prove to be a wrong remedy. Another plan of action for the abolition of
Caste is to begin with inter-caste dinners. This also, in my opinion, is an
inadequate remedy. There are many Castes which allow inter-dining. But
it is a common experience that inter-dining has not succeeded in killing
the spirit of Caste and the consciousness of Caste. I am convinced that the
real remedy is inter-marriage. Fusion of blood can alone create the feeling
of being kith and kin and unless this feeling of kinship, of being kindred,
becomes paramount the separatist feeling—the feeling of being aliens—
created by Caste will not vanish. Among the Hindus inter-marriage must
necessarily be a factor of greater force in social life than it need be in the
life of the non-Hindus. Where society is already well-knit by other ties,
marriage is an ordinary incident of life. But where society cut asunder,
marriage as a binding force becomes a matter of urgent necessity. The real
remedy for breaking Caste is inter-marriage. Nothing else will serve as the
solvent of Caste. Your Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal has adopted this line of attack 
It is a direct, and frontal attack, and I congratulate you upon a correct
diagnosis and more upon your having shown the courage to tell the Hindus
what is really wrong with them. Political tyranny is nothing compared to
social tyranny and a reformer, who defies society, is a much more courageous
man than a politician, who defies Government. You are right in holding
that Caste will cease to be an operative force only when inter-dining and
inter-marriage have become matters of common course. You have located
the source of the disease. But is your prescription the right prescription for
the disease ? Ask yourselves this question; Why is it that a large majority
of Hindus do not inter-dine and do not inter-marry? Why is it that your
cause is not popular ? There can be only one answer to this question and
it is that inter-dining and inter-marriage are repugnant to the beliefs and
dogmas which the Hindus regard as sacred. Caste is not a physical object
like a wall of bricks or a line of barbed wire which prevents the Hindus from
co-mingling and which has, therefore, to be pulled down. Caste is a notion,
it is a state of the mind. The destruction of Caste does not therefore mean
the destruction of a physical barrier. It means a notional change. Caste may
be bad. Caste may lead to conduct so gross as to be called man’s inhumanity
to man. All the same, it must be recognized that the Hindus observe Caste
not because they are inhuman or wrong headed. They observe Caste because
they are deeply religious. People are not wrong in observing Caste. In my
view, what is wrong is their religion, which has inculcated this notion of
Caste. If this is correct, then obviously the enemy, you must grapple with,
is not the people who observe Caste, but the Shastras which teach them
this religion of Caste. Criticising and ridiculing people for not inter-dining
or inter-marrying or occasionally holding inter-caste dinners and celebrating
inter-caste marriages, is a futile method of achieving the desired end. The
real remedy is to destroy the belief in the sanctity of the Shastras. How
do you expect to succeed, if you allow the Shastras to continue to mould
the beliefs and opinions of the people ? Not to question the authority of the
Shastras, to permit the people to believe in their sanctity and their sanctions
and to blame them and to criticise them for their acts as being irrational
and inhuman is a incongruous way of carrying on social reform. Reformers
working for the removal of untouchability including Mahatma Gandhi, do
not seem to realize that the acts of the people are merely the results of
their beliefs inculcated upon their minds by the Shastras and that people
will not change their conduct until they cease to believe in the sanctity of
the Shastras on which their conduct is founded. No wonder that such efforts
have not produced any results. You also seem to be erring in the same way
as the reformers working in the cause of removing untouchability. To agitate
for and to organise inter-caste dinners and inter-caste marriages is like forced
feeding brought about by artificial means. Make every man and woman free
from the thraldom of the Shastras, cleanse their minds of the pernicious notions founded on the Shastras, and he or she will inter-dine and intermarry, without your telling him or her to do so.
It is no use seeking refuge in quibbles. It is no use telling people that
the Shastras do not say what they are believed to say, grammatically
read or logically interpreted. What matters is how the Shastras have been
understood by the people. You must take the stand that Buddha took. You
must take the stand which Guru Nanak took. You must not only discard
the Shastras, you must deny their authority, as did Buddha and Nanak.
You must have courage to tell the Hindus, that what is wrong with them
is their religion—the religion which has produced in them this notion of the
sacredness of Caste. Will you show that courage ?