Friends,
I am really sorry for the members of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal who
have so very kindly invited me to preside over this Conference. I am
sure they will be asked many questions for having selected me as the
President. The Mandal will be asked to explain as to why it has imported
a man from Bombay to preside over a function which is held in Lahore.
I believe the Mandal could easily have found some one better qualified
than myself to preside on the occasion. I have criticised the Hindus. I
have questioned the authority of the Mahatma whom they revere. They
hate me. To them I am a snake in their garden. The Mandal will no
doubt be asked by the politically-minded Hindus to explain why it has
called me to fill this place of honour. It is an act of great daring. I shall
not be surprised if some political Hindus regard it as an insult. This
selection of mine cannot certainly please the ordinary religiously-minded
Hindus. The Mandal may be asked to explain why it has disobeyed the
Shastric injunction in selecting the President. Accoding to the Shastras
the Brahmin is appointed to be the Guru for the three Varnas, o.kk Zuke
czkã.kks xq#, is a direction of the Shastras. The Mandal therefore knows
from whom a Hindu should take his lessons and from whom he should
not. The Shastras do not permit a Hindu to accept any one as his Guru
merely because he is well-versed. This is made very clear by Ramdas, a
Brahmin saint from Maharashtra, who is alleged to have inspired Shivaji
to establish a Hindu Raj. In his Dasbodh, a socio-politico-religious treatise
in Marathi verse Ramdas asks, addressing the Hindus, can we accept an
Antyaja to be our Guru because he is a Pandit (i.e. learned) and gives
an answer in the negative. What replies to give to these questions is a
matter which I must leave to the Mandal. The Mandal knows best the
reasons which led it to travel to Bombay to select a president, to fix upon
a man so repugnant to the Hindus and to descend so low in the scale
as to select an Antyaja— an untouchable—to address an audience of the
Savarnas. As for myself you will allow me to say that I have accepted the
invitation much against my will and also against the will of many of my
fellow untouchables. I know that the Hindus are sick of me. I know that
I am not a persona grata with them. Knowing all this I have deliberately
kept myself away from them. I have no desire to inflict myself upon them.
I have been giving expression to my views from my own platform. This
has already caused a great deal of heartburning and irritation. I have
no desire to ascend the platform of the Hindus to do within their sight
what I have been doing within their hearing. If I am here it is because
of your choice and not because of my wish. Yours is a cause of social
reform. That cause has always made an appeal to me and it is because
of this that I felt I ought not to refuse an opportunity of helping the
cause especially when you think that I can help it. Whether what I am going to say today will help you in any way to solve the problem you are
grappling with is for you to judge. All I hope to do is to place before you
my views on the problem.
The path of social reform like the path to heaven at any rate in India,
is strewn with many difficulties. Social reform in India has few friends and
many critics. The critics fall into two distinct classes. One class consists of
political reformers and the other of the socialists.
It was at one time recognized that without social efficiency no permanent
progress in the other fields of activity was possible, that owing to mischief
wrought by the evil customs, Hindu Society was not in a state of efficiency
and that ceaseless efforts must be made to eradicate these evils. It was due
to the recognition of this fact that the birth of the National Congress was
accompanied by the foundation of the Social Conference. While the Congress
was concerned with defining the weak points in the political organisation of
the country, the Social Conference was engaged in removing the weak points
in the social organisation of the Hindu Society. For some time the Congress
and the Conference worked as two wings of one common activity and they
held their annual sessions in the same pandal. But soon the two wings
developed into two parties, a Political Reform Party and a Social Reform
Party, between whom there raged a fierce controversy. The Political Reform
Party supported the National Congress and Social Reform Party supported
the Social Conference. The two bodies thus became two hostile camps. The
point at issue was whether social reform should precede political reform.
For a decade the forces were evenly balanced and the battle was fought
without victory to either side. It was however evident that the fortunes of
the Social Conference were ebbing fast. The gentlemen who presided over
the sessions of the Social Conference lamented that the majority of the
educated Hindus were for political advancement and indifferent to social
reform and that while the number of those who attended the Congress was
very large and the number who did not attend but who sympathized with
it even larger, the number of those who attended the Social Conference was
very much smaller. This indifference, this thinning of its ranks was soon
followed by active hostility from the politicians. Under the leadership of
the late Mr. Tilak, the courtesy with which the Congress allowed the Social
Conference the use of its pandal was withdrawn and the spirit of enmity
went to such a pitch that when the Social Conference desired to erect its
own pandal a threat to burn the pandal was held out by its opponents. Thus
in course of time the party in favour of political reform won and the Social
Conference vanished and was forgotten. The speech, delivered by Mr. W.C.
Bonnerji in 1892 at Allahabad as President of the eighth session of the
Congress, sounds like a funeral oration at the death of the Social Conference and is so typical of the Congress attitude that I venture to quote from it
the following extract. Mr. Bonnerji said :
“I for one have no patience with those who say we shall not be fit for political
reform until we reform our social system. I fail to see any connection between
the two. . .Are we not fit (for political reform) because our widows remain
unmarried and our girls are given in marriage earlier than in other countries ?
because our wives and daughters do not drive about with us visiting our friends ?
because we do not send our daughters to Oxford and Cambridge ?” (Cheers)
I have stated the case for political reform as put by Mr. Bonnerji. There
were many who are happy that the victory went to the Congress. But those
who believe in the importance of social reform may ask, is the argument
such as that of Mr. Bonnerji final ? Does it prove that the victory went to
those who were in the right ? Does it prove conclusively that social reform
has no bearing on political reform ? It will help us to understand the matter
if I state the other side of the case. I will draw upon the treatment of the
untouchables for my facts.
Under the rule of the Peshwas in the Maratha country the untouchable
was not allowed to use the public streets if a Hindu was coming along lest
he should pollute the Hindu by his shadow. The untouchable was required
to have a black thread either on his wrist or in his neck as a sign or a mark
to prevent the Hindus from getting themselves polluted by his touch through
mistake. In Poona, the capital of the Peshwa, the untouchable was required
to carry, strung from his waist, a broom to sweep away from behind the
dust he treaded on lest a Hindu walking on the same should be polluted.
In Poona, the untouchable was required to carry an earthen pot, hung in
his neck wherever he went, for holding his spit lest his spit falling on earth
should pollute a Hindu who might unknowingly happen to tread on it. Let
me take more recent facts. The tyranny practised by the Hindus upon the
Balais, an untouchable community in Central India, will serve my purpose.
You will find a report of this in the Times of India of 4th January 1928.
The correspondent of the Times of India reported that high caste Hindus,
viz. Kalotas, Rajputs and Brahmins including the Patels and Patwaris of
villages of Kanaria, Bicholi-Hafsi, Bicholi-Mardana and of about 15 other
villages in the Indore district (of the Indore State) informed the Balais of
their respective villages that if they wished to live among them they must
conform to the following rules :
 (1) Balais must not wear gold-lace-bordered pugrees.
 (2) They must not wear dhotis with coloured or fancy borders.
 (3) They must convey intimation of the death of any Hindu to relatives
of the deceased—no matter how far away these relatives may be
living.
(4) In all Hindu marriages, Balais must play music before the processions
and during the marriage.
 (5) Balai women must not wear gold or silver ornaments; they must not
wear fancy gowns or jackets.
 (6) Balai women must attend all cases of confinement of Hindu women.
 (7) Balais must render services without demanding remuneration and
must accept whatever a Hindu is pleased to give.
 (8) If the Balais do not agree to abide by these terms they must clear
out of the villages. The Balais refused to comply ; and the Hindu
element proceeded against them. Balais were not allowed to get water
from the village wells; they were not allowed to let go their cattle
to graze. Balais were prohibited from passing through land owned
by a Hindu, so that if the field of a Balai was surrounded by fields
owned by Hindus, the Balai could have no access to his own field.
The Hindus also let their cattle graze down the fields of Balais. The
Balais submitted petitions to the Darbar against these persecutions ;
but as they could get no timely relief, and the oppression continued,
hundreds of Balais with their wives and children were obliged to
abandon their homes in which their ancestors lived for generations
and to migrate to adjoining States, viz. to villages in Dhar, Dewas,
Bagli, Bhopal, Gwalior and other States. What happened to them in
their new homes may for the present be left out of our consideration.
The incident at Kavitha in Gujarat happened only last year. The
Hindus of Kavitha ordered the untouchables not to insist upon
sending their children to the common village school maintained by
Government. What sufferings the untouchables of Kavitha had to
undergo for daring to exercise a civic right against the wishes of
the Hindus is too well known to need detailed description. Another
instance occurred in the village of Zanu in the Ahmedabad district
of Gujarat. In November 1935 some untouchable women of well-to-do
families started fetching water in metal pots. The Hindus looked upon
the use of metal pots by untouchables as an affront to their dignity
and assaulted the untouchable women for their impudence. A most
recent event is reported from the village Chakwara in Jaipur State.
It seems from the reports that have appeared in the newspapers that
an untouchable of Chakwara who had returned from a pilgrimage had
arranged to give a dinner to his fellow untouchables of the village
as an act of religious piety. The host desired to treat the guests to
a sumptuous meal and the items served included ghee (butter) also.
But while the assembly of untouchables was engaged in partaking of
the food, the Hindus in their hundreds, armed with lathis, rushed to
the scene, despoiled the food and belaboured the untouchables who left the food they were served with and ran away for their lives.
And why was this murderous assault committed on defenceless
untouchables ? The reason given is that the untouchable host was
impudent enough to serve ghee and his untouchable guests were
foolish enough to taste it. Ghee is undoubtedly a luxury for the rich.
But no one would think that consumption of ghee was a mark of
high social status. The Hindus of Chakwara thought otherwise and
in righteous indignation avenged themselves for the wrong done to
them by the untouchables, who insulted them by treating ghee as
an item of their food which they ought to have known could not be
theirs, consistently with the dignity of the Hindus. This means that
an untouchable must not use ghee even if he can afford to buy it,
since it is an act of arrogance towards the Hindus. This happened
on or about the 1st of April 1936 !
Having stated the facts, let me now state the case for social reform.
In doing this, I will follow Mr. Bonnerji, as nearly as I can and ask the
political-minded Hindus “Are you fit for political power even though you do
not allow a large class of your own countrymen like the untouchables to
use public school ? Are you fit for political power even though you do not
allow them the use of public wells ? Are you fit for political power even
though you do not allow them the use of public streets ? Are you fit for
political power even though you do not allow them to wear what apparel
or ornaments they like ? Are you fit for political power even though you
do not allow them to eat any food they like ?” I can ask a string of such
questions. But these will suffice. I wonder what would have been the reply
of Mr. Bonnerji. I am sure no sensible man will have the courage to give an
affirmative answer. Every Congressman who repeats the dogma of Mill that
one country is not fit to rule another country must admit that one class is
not fit to rule another class.
How is it then that the Social Reform Party lost the battle ? To understand
this correctly it is necessary, to take note of the kind of social reform
which the reformers were agitating for. In this connection it is necessary
to make a distinction between social reform in the sense of the reform of
the Hindu Family and social reform in the sense of the reorganization
and reconstruction of the Hindu Society. The former has relation to widow
remarriage, child marriage etc., while the latter relates to the abolition of
the Caste System. The Social Conference was a body which mainly concerned
itself with the reform of the high caste Hindu Family. It consisted mostly of
enlightened high caste Hindus who did not feel the necessity for agitating
for the abolition of caste or had not the courage to agitate for it. They felt
quite naturally a greater urge to remove such evils as enforced widowhood,
child marriages etc., evils which prevailed among them and which were personally felt by them. They did not stand up for the reform of the Hindu
society. The battle that was fought centered round the question of the reform
of the family. It did not relate to the social reform in the sense of the breakup of the caste system. It was never put in issue by the reformers. That is
the reason why the Social Reform Party lost.
I am aware that this argument cannot alter the fact that political reform
did in fact gain precedence over social reform. But the argument has this
much value if not more. It explains why social reformers lost the battle. It
also helps us to understand how limited was the victory which the Political
Reform Party obtained over the Social Reform Party and that the view
that social reform need not precede political reform is a view which may
stand only when by social reform is meant the reform of the family. That
political reform cannot with impunity take precedence over social reform in
the sense of reconstruction of society is a thesis which, I am sure, cannot be
controverted. That the makers of political constitutions must take account of
social forces is a fact which is recognized by no less a person than Ferdinand
Lassalle, the friend and co-worker of Karl Marx. In addressing a Prussian
audience in 1862 Lassalle said :
“The constitutional questions are in the first instance not questions of right
but questions of might. The actual constitution of a country has its existence
only in the actual condition of force which exists in the country : hence political
constitutions have value and permanence only when they accurately express those
conditions of forces which exist in practice within a society.”
But it is not necessary to go to Prussia. There is evidence at home. What
is the significance of the Communal Award with its allocation of political
power in defined proportions to diverse classes and communities ? In my
view, its significance lies in this that political constitution must take note of
social organisation. It shows that the politicians who denied that the social
problem in India had any bearing on the political problem were forced to
reckon with the social problem in devising the constitution. The Communal
Award is so to say the nemesis following upon the indifference and neglect
of social reform. It is a victory for the Social Reform Party which shows that
though defeated they were in the right in insisting upon the importance of
social reform. Many, I know, will not accept this finding. The view is current,
and it is pleasant to believe in it, that the Communal Award is unnatural
and that it is the result of an unholy alliance between the minorities
and the bureaucracy. I do not wish to rely on the Communal Award as a
piece of evidence to support my contention if it is said that it is not good
evidence. Let us turn to Ireland. What does the history of Irish Home Rule
show ? It is well-known that in the course of the negotiations between
the representatives of Ulster and Southern Ireland, Mr. Redmond, the
representative Ireland, in order to bring Ulster in a Home Rule Constitution common to the whole of Ireland said to the representatives of Ulster :
“Ask any political safeguards you like and you shall have them” What was
the reply that Ulstermen gave ? Their reply was “Damn your safeguards,
we don’t want to be ruled by you on any terms.” People who blame the
minorities in India ought to consider what would have happened to the
political aspirations of the majority if the minorities had taken the attitude
which. Ulster took. Judged by the attitude of Ulster to Irish Home Rule, is
it nothing that the minorities agreed to be ruled by the majority which has
not shown much sense of statesmanship, provided some safeguards were
devised for them ? But this is only incidental. The main question is why did
Ulster take this attitude? The only answer I can give is that there was a
social problem between Ulster and Southern Ireland the problem between
Catholics and Protestants, essentially a problem of Caste. That Home Rule
in Ireland would be Rome Rule was the way in which the Ulstermen had
framed their answer. But that is only another way of stating that it was
the social problem of Caste between the Catholics and Protestants, which
prevented the solution of the political problem. This evidence again is sure
to be challenged. It will be urged that here too the hand of the Imperialist
was at work. But my resources are not exhausted. I will give evidence
from the History of Rome. Here no one can say that any evil genius was
at work. Any one who has studied the History of Rome will know that the
Republican Constitution of Rome bore marks having strong resemblance to
the Communal Award. When the kingship in Rome was abolished, the Kingly
power or the Imperium was divided between the Consuls and the Pontifex
Maximus. In the Consuls was vested the secular authority of the King,
while the latter took over the religious authority of King. This Republican
Constitution had provided that, of the two Consuls one was to be Patrician
and the other Plebian. The same constitution had also provided that, of the
Priests under the Pontifex Maximus, half were to be Plebians and the other
half Patricians. Why is it that the Republican Constitution of Rome had
these provisions which, as I said, resemble so strongly the provisions of the
Communal Award ? The only answer one can get is that the Constitution
of Republican Rome had to take account of the social division between the
Patricians and the Plebians, who formed two distinct castes. To sum up,
let political reformers turn to any direction they like, they will find that in
the making of a constitution, they cannot ignore the problem arising out of
the prevailing social order.
The illustrations which I have taken in support of the proposition that
social and religious problems have a bearing on political constitutions seem
to be too particular. Perhaps they are. But it should not be supposed that
the bearing of the one on the other is limited. On the other hand one can
say that generally speaking History bears out the proposition that political
revolutions have always been preceded by social and religious revolutions. The religious Reformation started by Luther was the precursor of the political
emancipation of the European people. In England Puritanism led to the
establishment of political liberty. Puritanism founded the new world. It was
Puritanism which won the war of American Independence and Puritanism
was a religious movement. The same is true of the Muslim Empire. Before
the Arabs became a political power they had undergone a thorough religious
revolution started by the Prophet Mohammad. Even Indian History supports
the same conclusion. The political revolution led by Chandragupta was
preceded by the religious and social revolution of Buddha. The political
revolution led by Shivaji was preceded by the religious and social reform
brought about by the saints of Maharashtra. The political revolution of the
Sikhs was preceded by the religious and social revolution led by Guru Nanak.
It is unnecessary to add more illustrations. These will suffice to show that
the emancipation of the mind and the soul is a necessary preliminary for
the political expansion of the people.